Geography
Grade 11
Educational Publications Department
All rights reserved
First Print
Second Print
Third Print
- 2015
- 2016
- 2019
ISBN 978-955-25-0318-4
Published by Educational Publications Department
Printed by Sanvin (Pvt) Ltd.
No. 35/3, Keragala Road, Halummahara, Delgoda.
The National Anthem of Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka
Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya
Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha
Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
Oba we apa vidya
Obamaya apa sathya
Oba we apa shakthi
Apa hada thula bhakthi
Oba apa aloke
Apage anuprane
Oba apa jeevana we
Apa mukthiya oba we
Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha
Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara
Eka mavakage daru kela bevina
Yamu yamu vee nopama
Prema vada sema bheda durerada
Namo, Namo Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjda
tl ksjfiys fjfikd
tl mdge;s tl reêrh fõ
wm lh ;=< ÿjkd
tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhda
tl f,i tys jefvkd
Ôj;a jk wm fuu ksjfia
fid¢k isáh hq;= fõ
ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkS
fj<S iu.s oñkS
rka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;d
lsis l, fkdu Èrkd
wdkkao iurfldaka
J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®
Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®
|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®
Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®
AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®
JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ®
|ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷»
|»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ
¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hß
JØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀ
ö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á
¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.
BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß
PÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.
Being innovative, changing with right knowledge
Be a light to the country as well as to the world.
Message from the Hon. Minister of Education
The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to
changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new
challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology,
communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are
liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new
technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities
would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan
Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.
This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book
properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is
able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of
your parents and elders.
Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future
of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the
rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves
to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will
suffice your aim.
It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on
your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future.
Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.
I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an
honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.
Akila Viraj Kariyawasam
Minister of Education
Foreword
The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more
complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development.
The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences,
technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to
produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the
objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing
learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a
learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher
education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and
to obtain learning experiences.
The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered
you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you
should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely
hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a
virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the
country.
I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and
writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department
who have strived to offer this textbook to you.
W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,
Commissioner General of Educational Publications,
Educational Publications Department,
Isurupaya,
Battaramulla.
2019.04.10
Monitoring and Supervision - W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka
Commissioner General of Educational Publications
Direction
Co-ordination
- W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli
Commissioner (Development),
Educational Publications Department
- Anupa Madhupani Weerarathne
Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Dakshina Kasturiarachchi
Assistant Commissioner (2017, 2019)
Educational Publications Department
Panel of Editors
1. Prof. N.K. Dhangalla
(Emeritus Professor)
- University of Kelaniya
2. Prof. S.A. Norbert
- University of Colombo
3. R.P. Peiris
4. R.A.D.N. Rupasinghe
5. Anupa Madhupani Weerarathne
6. M. P. Ranjani Dhanawardhana
7. S. Karunagaran
- Additional Commissioner (Retired),
Department of Examinations
- Deputy Commissioner,
Educational Publications Department
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Director, Department of Social Science,
National Institute of Education
- Lecturer,
National Institute of Education
Panel of Writers
1. W.Kanthi Perera Darmawardhana - Teacher Service,
2. R.A.Chandrasiri
3. N.A. Chithralatha
St.Peters' Central College
Negombo
- ISA, Divisional Education
Office - Maradagahamula,
Divulapitiya
- ISA, Zonal Education Office
Matara
4. K.K.U Gunarathne
5. H.M.J.A.B. Heenkenda
6. H.Dahanayake
7. K.Somadasa
8. D.M.J.Bandara
9. D.H.Attigala
10. S.Balasundaram
11. S.A.H.Husna
- Teacher Service, G/Polpagoda
M.V, Yakkalamulla
- ISA, Zonal Ecucation Office,
Kandy
- Chief Editor (Retired)
Educational Publications Department
- ISA, Zonal Education Office
Matara
- Teacher Service,
Kuli/ Saranath M.V, Kuliyapitiya
- Teacher Service, Museus College,
Colombo 07
- Assistant Commissioner
(Retired), Department of Examinations
- Assistant Director of Education,
Zonal Ecucation Office, Dehiowita
12. Sivachithra Palani
- ISA, Zonal Education Office, Jaffna
13. Yalini Karunagaran
Language Editor
Hasini Thalagala
Cover Design
R.A.Ureka Dilrukshi
- Teacher Service,
St. Clare's College, Colombo 06
- Assistant Director of Education,
Ministry of Education
- IT Unit,
Educational Publications Department
Computer Designing & Formatting
(Maps, Figures and Computer Page Designing)
Abisheka Ranasinghege
- IT Unit,
Educational Publications
Department
R.A.Ureka Dilrukshi - IT Unit,
Educational Publications Department
Content
1. Natural resources of the Earth
2. Natural resources of Sri Lanka
3. The world population
4. The population of Sri Lanka
5. Development
6. Natural hazards in the world
7. Natural hazards in Sri Lanka
8. Climatic changes
9. 1: 50 000 Topographical maps of Sri Lanka
10. Using graphs to represent data
Natural Resources of the Earth
Things that are found in the natural environment which are required for the
existence of man and his activities are called natural resources.
Rocks, minerals, soil, water, air, sunlight, vegetation and wildlife has
a special place among the other natural resources. Man adds value to resources.
Value of resources would be decided according to the needs of man and technology.
The value of resources change from time to time.
The aim of this chapter is to study about natural resources on the Earth such as
rocks, minerals, soil, water, air, sunlight, vegetation and wildlife.
Resources of the environment are diverse and they can be classified in
many ways. (Fig. 1.1)
For free distribution
Fig. 1.1 - Classification of Resources
For free distribution
Natural resources can be categorized in the following manner as well.
Natural
Resources
Exhaustible
resources
Non - Exhaustible
resources
Renewable
resources
Water
Sunlight
Forests
Wild life
Fossil fuel
Forests
Fertile soil
Rocks
Metal minerals
(iron ore, copper,
gold)
Non Metal
minerals (coal,
Gems, Silica)
Natural resources can be classified as Living and Non-living resources
Living Resources
Plant and animal resources in the biosphere.
(Biotic components)
(Forests, animal resources, aquatic resources).
Non-Living Resources
Water in the Hydrosphere, gases in the
Atmosphere, minerals and soil in the
Lithosphere, soil.
(Abiotic components)
(Water, soil, minerals, wind, tides).
Activities
01. Write a suitable definition for “Natural resources.”
02. Explain by citing two examples to show how man converts environmental
resources into valuable resources.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Rocks
Rocks have an important place among the other natural resources. The crust
of the earth is composed of rocks. Rocks are formed by minerals. We can see some
special features in the rocks formed by minerals. Some rocks are soft while some of
them are hard. The rock layers are thin in some places while it is deeply spread in
others. Hence, the values of the rocks differ according to the composition, distribution
and their structure. Rocks can be classified into three types based on their origin.
1. Igneous rocks
2. Sedimentary rocks
3. Metamorphic rocks
Igneous Rocks
Igneous rocks are formed by magma coming from the interior of the
Earth and solidifying on the crust. They are also called ''Basic rocks.'' They are
crystalline rocks formed by immense heat and pressure. There is a glassy and soft
granular structure in them. Granite, basalt, gabbro are some examples for igneous
rocks.
Intrusive igneous rocks are formed by cooling
and solidifying magma in the interior of the
Earth. Extrusive igneous rocks are formed
by cooling of hot magma when reaching the
surface of the Earth.
Uses of igneous rocks
Fig. 1.2 - I gneous rocks (Granite)
² Granite is used to construct buildings.
² Making ornaments.
² To obtain minerals such as tin and chromium.
Igneous rocks, which are resistant to erosion, in slopes prevent soil erosion.
² To construct highways and roads.
There is an aesthetic value in the different physical formations of these rocks.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sedimentary Rocks
Sedimentary rocks are formed by deposition and
cementation of weathered particles of igneous and
metamorphic rocks.
They are also called secondary rocks as
they are formed by the sediments of principle
rocks. Limestone, Coal and Gypsum can be cited as
examples for types of sedimentary rocks.
Uses of sedimentary rocks
Fig. 1.3 - Sedimentary Rocks
(Gypsum)
Alluvial sedimentary rocks are used for agricultural purposes.
² Limestone and sandstone are used in constructing buildings.
² Used as a raw material in pottery industry.
² For production of ornamental goods.
² Coal is a source of energy.
Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic rocks are formed when
Igneous and Sedimentary rocks are subjected to
high pressure and high temperature.
Gneiss, marble, diamonds and dolomite are
examples for metamorphic rocks. Metamorphic
rocks can be seen more commonly than the other
types of rocks.
Uses of metamorphic rocks
² Diamonds are used to make jewellery.
² Marbles are used to create statues and
ornaments.
² Graphite is used to make lubricants, casting
moulds and paint.
² Dolomite is used for manufacturing fertilizer.
Fig. 1.4 - Metamorphics Rocks
(Graphite)
Areas where gneiss rocks were found were selected to construct ancient
places of worship as those rocks were hard.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
01' List the main types of rocks and give two examples for each of them.
02' Draw a poster to show the uses of different kinds of rocks.
Minerals
Minerals also have an important place among natural resources.
"A mineral is a naturally occurring substance that is solid and inorganic
representable by a chemical formula and has an ordered atomic structure"
Source - https:llenwikipedia.org/wiki/Mineral
Earth is formed with rocks and rocks are formed with minerals. There
is a strong relationship between minerals and rocks. Igneous, sedimentary and
metamorphic rocks are made up of valuable minerals. The value of mineral
resources depend on their uses.
There are about 2000 kinds of minerals in the world but people use only
a few of them. Different kinds of minerals have been used for making weapons
and tools during different periods of human civilization.
Mineral resources can be categorized as follows.
Fuel Minerals
Coal, Crude oil
Metallic minerals
Iron ore, Manganese, Copper
Non Metallic minerals
Graphite, Sand, Limestone and Phosphate
We discuss the most important resources such as iron ore, graphite and
crude oil in this lesson.
Iron Ore - An important factor for the development of human civilization is
the use of iron. Iron is extracted from iron ore. Iron ore is cleansed and smelted
to extract iron. Through a chemical process, iron is turned into steel. Iron
and steel have become very essential materials for industries like agriculture,
construction and transportation because of their special qualities.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Main kinds of iron ore are Hematite, Magnetite and Limonite. An iron
ore deposit would be economically valuable only if it contributes at least 30%
of high quality iron. Map 1.1 shows the regions in the world with iron ore
deposits.
Map 1.1 – Distribution of deposits of iron ore in the world
Activities
Iron and steel produced from iron ore are essential resources for industries like
agriculture and transportation fields. Explain this statement giving examples.
Graphite
Graphite is an important mineral resource. Graphite industry became very
important during the periods of world war. According to the classification of minerals,
graphite come under non - metal minerals. Depending on the way it is embedded in
the earth graphite can be further classified as follows.
² Vein graphite (As pure slabs)
² Crystalline flake graphite (As Flakes)
² Graphite spread in rocks
For free distribution
For free distribution
Main graphite producing countries of the world.
India
Korea
Mexico
Turkey
Brazil
Tanzania
Sri Lanka
Madagascar
India is the number one graphite producer in the world, producing 60%
of world’s graphite production. Sri Lanka also has gained an important place as a
country that produces high quality graphite.
Graphite is an industrial raw material used in the electronic industry,
construction of metal coverings, production of lubricants, pencils and paints.
Graphite is also important as a heat and electric conductor.
Activities
1. Name the three types of graphite.
2. Explain the importance of graphite as a resource by giving examples.
3. Mark and name in a blank map of the world, the places where graphite is
produced and, locations of the main iron ore deposits in the world.
Soil is formed by decomposition of organic materials for a long time
and by mixing up remains of weathering rocks.
Soil is an essential resource for man. Survival of plants and animals depend
on soil. It provides nutrition and water for the growth of plants. The soil layer
is found as a thin layer on the surface of the earth. The thickness of the soil layer
differs from one place to another.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Factors that contribute to
the formation of soil
² Parent rock
² Topographical features
² Climate
² Time
² Parts of plants and animals
² Human Activities
Parent rock - Minerals are added to the
soil by weathering of parent rock or deposition
of sediments. The soil content, (composition)
categories and the colour of the soil differ
according to the nature of the parent rock.
Topographical
features
- According
topographical features, erosion of soil on earth's
surface, deposition and infiltration of water into
soil affect the formation of soil. Nature of soil
and the drainage pattern are affected by the slope
of an area.
Climate - Rainfall and temperature are climatic factors that affect the formation
of soil. Interior temperature of the soil, the time period in which the moisture
of soil present within a year, quantity of water that is retained in the soil are
factors which affect the nature and formation of soil.
Plant and animal parts - Soil organisms and the cover of trees are sources that
add organic particles into the soil. The cover of trees is the most important one.
In areas where organic systems are abundant, a fertile humus soil layer would be
formed within a short period of time.
Time - Time is an important factor in deciding the nature and the maturity of
the soil. Fertility of soil increases when organic particles are deposited during
a long period of time. Such soil which has a large quantity of mineral salts is
suitable for the growth of plants.
Human Activities - Human activities are also a cause for variation of the nature
of soil and growth of soil. Human activities can completely change the quality of
soil and soil could also become infertile.
Soil has been used for agricultural purposes even from the time that man
established permanent settlements.
Use of soil for human activities has increased along with the increasing
needs of man. Instead of a variety of crops, cultivation of the same crop for a long
time has caused decline in bio diversity and it eventually results infertile soil.
Since soil is essential for agriculture, more attention is paid for the
conservation of soil.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Soil Profile
A soil profile is the set of layers of soil that is formed over a long period
of time. Such a profile in seen in figure 1.5.
Horizon A
- It consists of decayed particles
and partially decayed parts of animals and plants.
The parent rock had completely weathered and a
large quantity of organic particles are present. It is
darker than the other horizons below. This soil is
called Humus.
Horizon B
- Mineral salts and clay particles
leach to the Horizon A and some types of clay
are deposited in this layer of soil. Horizon B is
relatively lighter in shade than Horizon A.
Quantity of organic matter is low in thais horizon.
- This Horizon consists of parent
Horizon C
rock particles and remains or particles which are
brought from other substances.
Fig. 1.5 - Soil Profile
Activities
01. List the factors that contribute to the formation of soil and briefly explain
three of them.
02. Draw the Horizons of soil and write the features of each.
03. Explain how soil helps the survival of plants and animals.
04. List three steps which can be taken to conserve soil.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Water Resources
Water is an essential resource for the survival of man and other natural
ecological systems. Man cannot live without water except for a few days.
Water is a resource which contributes to human activities directly or indirectly.
The Earth is called the ‘Blue Planet’
because it is the only planet which
has water. The Earth consists of
71.8% of water while the land area is
28.2%. This water is stored in the
Oceans, seas, rivers, reservoirs, tanks
and ponds. 97% of water is sea water
while 03% is fresh water. Man can
easily use only 01% of the water which
is a small quantity. Fig. 1.3 show how
water resources are distributed Fig.
1.4 shows places where water gets
stored due to the water cycle as well.
Fig. 1.6 Distribution of water resources.hppt//autoflownewolt.blogspoh
Source : http://artoflonewolf.blogspot.-2015/06/17
Fig. 1.7 - Water cycle
Source: http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/2015/06/16
For free distribution
For free distribution
Water is added to the environment due to evaporation
and transpiration from plants and animals
Water stored in oceans and seas
Water stored in rivers, canals, snow
Water absorbed by the soil
Water from rain and irrigations which inﬁltrates into the earth
and deposits on impervious rocks.
(This water is used through wells and springs)
Atmospheric
water
Oceanic
water
Surface
water
Soil water
Ground
water
Sources of water
² Oceans
² Rain
Internal
reservoirs
Ponds
² Ground water
aquifers
² Glaciers
² Springs
Importance of water as a resource
Water is essential to man for of day to day activities, agriculture,
industries and transportation. Man needs about three litters of water per day. If
it could not be provided, he would be dehydrated.
For free distribution
Fig. 1.8 - Importance of water as a resource
For free distribution
Water pollution occurs since waste water is added to rivers and streams.
This contaminated water is not in a condition to be consumed by man, animals and
the bio system. Thus water had become a scarce resource. It is assumed that this
condition may lead to conflicts among people and nations to obtain water in the
future.
Activities
1. Name three source from which man can obtain water.
2. Explain in brief, the terms, groundwater, surface water and soil water.
3. ‘Water is essential for the survival of living beings’’ state 3 facts to prove
this statement.
4 . Suggest three activities that can be done to conserve the water resource.
Forests
Forest is a very important eco – system.
A Forest is a land eco- system consisting of trees, climbers and plants useful to
man and animals.
Forest have been used for many purposes since past. They are naturally
grown or cultivated.
Forests vary from country to country, and from area to area according to
the nature of climate and soil. There are different kinds of forests in the world,
but we consider only there main types of forests.
² Tropical rain forests
² Temperate forests
² Coniferous forests
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map 1.2 - Distribution of forests in the world
Tropical Rain Forests
Distribution
Special Features
Wildlife
² Region between tropic
² High bio-diversity
² Chimpanzee
of Cancer and Capricorn
² Speedy growth of plants
² Estuary of the River
² Several Layers of trees in
Amazon
² Central America
² The Congo basin
² Asian Region
the forest
² Trees have many broad
leaves
² There are creepers and
undergrowth Epiphytes
are abundant.
² Trees
like Mahogany,
Ebony, Bamboo, Sandal
wood, Acasia, Palms and
Eucalyptus can be seen.
² Tiger
² Gorilla
² Mouse deer
² Bear
² Varieties of
² Serpents
² Lizards
² Reptiles
² Varieties of fish
For free distribution
For free distribution
Distribution
² Latitudinal
extent
of these forests are
between 30o - 50o
North and South.
² These forests are
distributed in West
and Central Europe,
Eastern Coast of
North
America,
Australia, Argentina
South America and
South China.
Distribution
² These
forests
can be found in
between
areas
50o–60o
latitudes
the Northern
hemisphere.
² Western coast of
America to Eastern
of North
coast
America.
² North Europe and
North of Asia.
Temperate Forests
Special Features
² There are evergreen and
deciduous trees
² Less bio - diversity
² Hard heart wooded trees
and broad leaves
² No clear layers
Wildlife
² Bear
² Wolf
² Siberian Tiger
² Stag
² Varieties of birds
² Leaves
winter
during
² Varieties of reptiles
² Deer
² Trees
timber
provide
e c o n o m i c a l l y
valuable
Oak, Chest nut, Pine,
Eucalyptus Douglas Fir,
Beech, Ash and Lime
can be found.
Coniferous Forests
Special Features
² Most of the trees are
conical in shape.
² Trees are well adapted
conditions.
² Leaves
shaped.
are needle
² Oak, Maple, Beech,
Spruce, Fir, Larch,
Cedar, Poplar are trees
found here.
Erect trunks and
soft timber
Wildlife
² Rein deer
² Panda
² Polar bear
² Stag
² Lynxes
² Mink
² Varieties of foxes
² Seals
² Varieties of birds
For free distribution
For free distribution
Significance of these forests
² Protection of bio-diversity.
² Protection of wild life and ensure their survival.
² They are important as catchment areas and protects the underground water.
² Provides food, medicine, timber and fuel for living beings.
² Maintaining a clean atmosphere and help to maintain environmental balance.
² Gives natural beauty.
² Affects climatic conditions.
² Reduces soil erosion and protects fertility of soil.
Problems faced by Forests and living beings
² Clearance of Forests due to needs of increasing population.
² Destruction of plants and animals due to environmental pollution.
² Collecting plants and animals for commercial purposes put them in danger
of extinction.
² Breeding of invasive species of plants and animals.
² Forests are destroyed because of natural disasters and human activities
(bushfires, droughts, landslides, storms, setting fire to forests.)
² Construction of roads and development projects are also causes for forest
destruction.
² Many species of flora and fauna are threatened with extinction due to climatic
changes.
Activities
01' Mark the following places in a world map.
Amazon Forest, Congo Forest, Madagascar Islands, Deciduous Forest areas
of Europe, Coniferous Forests of North Asia.
02' Describe two reasons for destruction of Tropical Rain Forests.
03' Explain two problems faced by forests and wildlife.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Assessment
1. Using relevant pictures and statements do a classification of resources .
2. Find information regarding the resource in your environment and include
them in these categories.
3. List mottos about value of resources and conservation. Display them in your
school premises.
4. Prepare a article for the wall paper on the topic ‘Forests are our life’.
Bibliography and Sources
² Geography Grade 11 (2014) Educational Publications Department, Colombo
² Human Geography (Part II) Educational Publications Department, Colombo.
² Bio System Technology (Part I) ^2013&" Educational Publications Department,
Colombo.
² Natural Resources of Sri Lanka (2000), National Science Foundations.
http://artoflonewolf.blogspot.com/2015_06_17_archive.html
http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/details.cgi?aid=30580
Glossary
Rocks
² Minerals
- mdIdK
- Lksc
- £õøÓPÒ
- PÛ¯[PÒ
² Vegetation
- jDlaI,;d
- uõÁµ¨ ÷£õºøÁ
Exhaustible resources
- laIh jk iïm;a
- AÈÄÖ® ÁÍ[PÒ
² Non – exhaustible resources - laIh fkdjk iïm;a
- AÈÁøh¯õu ÁÍ[PÒ
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fossil fuel - fmdis, bkaOk - E°ºa _Ámk G›ö£õ¸Ò
² Metal minerals
- f,dayuh Lksc - E÷»õPU PÛ¯[PÒ
² Non metal mineral
- wf,dayuh Lksc
- E÷»õP©À»õu PÛ¯[PÒ
Renewable resources
- mqk¾ckkSh iïm;a
- «Ð¸ÁõUP ÁÍ[PÒ
Living resources
- Ôù iïm;a
- E°¸ÒÍ ÁÍ[PÒ
² Non Living resources
- wÔù iïm;a
- E°µØÓ ÁÍ[PÒ
Tides
- Woï
- ÁØÖ¨ ö£¸USPÒ
Earth's crust
- mDÓú mDIAGh
- ¦Â ÷©Ø£µ¨¦
Rock composition
- mdIdK ixhq;sh
- £õøÓa ÷\ºUøP
Igneous Rocks
- wd.afkah mdIdK
- w¨£õøÓPÒ
Sedimentary rocks
- wjidÈ; mdIdK
- Aøh¯À £õøÓPÒ
² Metamorphic rocks
- úmß; mdIdK
- E¸©õÔ¯ £õøÓPÒ
Crystalline rocks
- iaMálrEmS mdIdK
- £Î[S¨ £õøÓPÒ
² Magma
² Heat
Pressure
- ue.aud
- ;dmh
- mSvkh
Condensation
- >kSNjkh
- ©U©õ
- öÁ¨£®
- A•UP®
- Jk[PÀ
Sediments
- wjidÈ;
- Aøh¯ÀPÒ
² Alluvial
- Èh¿
- ÁshÀ
Pottery industry
- l=U,a l¾udka;h
- ©m£õshU øPzöuõÈÀ
² Marble
² Diamonds
Statues
- lsß.re`v
- Èhuka;s
- m%;sud
- \»øÁU PÀ
- øÁµ®
- ]ø»
Lubricants
- ,sysis øjH
- ©\S Gsön´
Casting moulds
- jd;a;= wÉpq
- E¸UQ ÁõºzuÀ
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Organic matter
- fMkaøSh øjH
- ÷\uÚ¨ ö£õ¸Ò
Inorganic matter
- wffkkaøSh øjH
- A÷\uÚ¨ ö£õ¸Ò
Iron ore
- hmia
- C¸®¦z uõx
Electronic conductors
- úoHq;a ikakdhl
- C»zvµÛ¯À Phzv
² Decomposed matter
- Ô¾KdjfYaI
- E¸USø»¢u ö£õ¸Ò
Parent rock
² Deposition
- uõmdIdKh
- ksêidokh
- uõ´¨ £õøÓ
- £iuÀ
Soil colour
- mfia j¾Kh
- ©s {Ó®
Erosion
Infiltration
² Drainage
² Moisture
² Humus
² Maturity
- Ldokh
- ldkaÿùu
- c,jykh
- f;;ukh
- ysHquia
- mßK;Ndjh
- vßÚÀ/ A›¨¦
- FkÁiuÀ
- ÁiPõ»ø©¨¦
- Dµ¨£uß
- EUPÀ
- •xø©
Conservation
- ixrlaIKh
- ÷£o¨ £õxPõzuÀ
Soil Profile
- mdxY= me;slv
- ©s£UP¨ £õºøÁ
² Ground aquifer
- N+.; c,Orh
- uøµURÌ }÷µ¢v
Biological system
- ffcj moaO;s
- E°›¯À öuõSv
² Water cycle
- c,pl%h
- }º Ámh®
Evaporation
- jdIamSlrKh
- BÂ¯õUP®
Transpiration
- W;aiafõokh
- BÂ²°º¨¦
Springs
- W,am;a
- }¹ØÖ
Environmental balance
- mdßißl ;=,H;dj
- ö£ÍvPa \©{ø»
Ecological system
- mßir moaO;sh
- E°º `ÇÀ öuõSv
Tropical rain forest
- ksj¾;k j¾Id jkdka;r
- A¯Ú ©øÇUPõk
Temperate forests
- fi!uH l,dmSh jkdka;r
- CøhöÁ¨£U PõkPÒ
Coniferous forests
- fla;=Or jkdka;r
- F]°ø»U PõkPÒ
For free distribution
For free distribution
Biodiversity
- ffcj úúO;ajh
- E°›Ú¨ £ÀÁøPø©
² Undergrowth
- háfrdamKh
- RÌ {»ÁÍ›
Evergreen
² Deciduous
- iodyß;
- m;kYS,
- GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ
- Cø»²vº
Catchment areas
- c, fmdaIl m%foaY
- }÷µ¢x £SvPÒ
² Ground water store
- N=.; c, .nvdj
- uøµU RÌ }º÷\ª¨¦
Bushfire
² Motto
- <eõ.sks
- wdo¾Y mdG
² Wall paper
- ì;a;s mqj;am;
- Põmkz w
- Áõ\P®
- _Áº uõÒ
For free distribution
For free distribution
22 Natural Resources of Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka is rich with natural resources. Ocean, land, rock, soil, minerals,
water and forests are important resources among them.
The aim of this chapter is to study about utilization and conservation of natural
resources of Sri Lanka.
Ocean
The exact land area of Sri Lanka includes not only the land but a part
of the ocean too. An International Law was implemented on the 16th of
November 1994 which helps to decide the ownership of maritime boundary
in a country. According to that each coastal state owns a maritime boundary
less than twelve nautical miles from the coast. It is called ‘The territorial
maritime boundary’.
The air, sea and all internal resources of that boundary belong to Sri Lanka.
This area which has islands , lagoons, head lands, bays, coral reefs, sand and rocks
is very useful for the fishing industry and the tourism industry.
The zone between 12 -24 Nautical miles is called the 'Contiguous Zone’.
The government has the right to punish and take actions against the violation
of laws in customs , fishing , migrations and sanitary laws within this zone.
The Zone between 24 – 200 Nautical miles is called the ‘Exclusive
Economic Zone’. Living and non living natural resources, the sea bed and
water particles of that area belong to Sri Lanka.
Other than the above maritime boundaries, Mannar strait, Palk strait, Bay of
Bengal which belong to Historic waters (Internal waters) are divided between
Sri Lanka and India by an agreement. All activities in this zone are taken
place with the agreement of both parties.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fig. 2.1 Territorial maritime boundary
Activities
01. Name the main natural resources of Sri Lanka.
02. Explain the term, ‘Territorial maritime boundary.’
03.‘The ocean around Sri Lanka is a valuable natural resource’.Explain with
examples.
‘Land’ is also a very significant natural resource of Sri Lanka. The land
area of Sri Lanka is 65610 km2 including the islands around it. The land is utilized
For free distribution
For free distribution
according to the variation of physical features such as Topography climate, natural
vegetation and water resources. Settlements, home gardens, roads, agricultural
crop lands, forests, shrub land and internal reservoirs are such examples.
Study figure 2.2 and identify how the land of Sri Lanka is utilized
in different ways.
Fig. 2.2- Different ways the land is used
There are several main zones in Sri Lanka with a significant variation
of the physical features of the land and the specific features pertaining to these
areas could also be identified. Massive paddy fields and the irrigation systems in
the dry zone, tea estates and the terraced paddy cultivation in the central hills,
massive buildings with many storeys and the road systems in the urban lands ,
fishing industry in the coastal areas are examples for those specific features.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Problems related to utilization of land in Sri Lanka and methods of
conservation of land
Problem
Methods of conservation of land
² Biological resources are destructed
because of deforestation and
clearing of slopes.
² Flooding due to filling of low
lands and obstruction of drainage
systems.
² Filling of reservoirs.
² Destruction of coastal eco system .
² Environmental , health and sanitary
problems in the urban areas.
² Planning of
policies.
land utilization
² Planning the towns and cities in a
methodical way.
² Cultivating
environmental
friendly crops.
² Use new protective cultivation
methods such as ‘SALT’.
² Replanting forests.
² Creating coastal boundaries and
laws related
implementing
them.
² Banning removal of corals.
² Carrying out public awareness
programmes.
Activities
01. Explain briefly how land in Sri Lanka is utilized in different ways.
02. Explain the significance of land as a resource.
Rocks
Land of Sri Lanka consists of Igneous, Sedimentary and Metamorphic
rocks. These rocks are used for many purposes since past. When granite
metamorphoses, it turns into gneiss. They are used in construction of buildings
and roads. Hard gneiss was used for construction of stair ways, guard stones and
pillars in religious buildings of Anuradhapura, Mihintale etc. Hard gneiss was
also used in sculpting Samadhi and Aukana Buddha statue.
Miocene limestone is a sedimentary rock spread along the Jaffna Peninsula
and the Northwestern coast. It is used for production of cement, to smelt iron
ore and to construct buildings. Corals of the South Western coast are used for
For free distribution
For free distribution
producing lime. Dolomite, a metamorphic rock in Matale, Kandy, Balangoda,
Nalanda, Digana and Habarana is used as a fertilizer. It is also used in glass
and ceramic industries and it is also used to produce lime needed to construct
buildings.
Gneiss
Limestone
Corals
Dolomite
Fig. 2.3 Different varieties of rocks
Problems in utilization of rocks.
² Environmental pollution due to excavation and transportation of rocks.
² Coastal erosion and the flooding caused by sea.
² Occurrence of landslides and cracks on buildings caused by vibrations during
excavations.
² Barren lands which are unsuitable for cultivation.
Soil of Sri Lanka
Soil is formed by weathering of parent rocks and decomposition of
animal and plant matter. Factors such as climate, parent rock, vegetation
cover and slope land areas are important in the formation of soil. The quantity of
rainfall and the period of receiving rainfall are the most important factors that
help in the development process of soil in Sri Lanka. Constant rainfall and high
temperature expedite the weathering process of rocks. Although Sri Lanka is a
small island, a number of soil types are found due to the influence of various
factors. In this chapter we discuss seven main soil Groups in Sri Lanka.
² Red brown soil
² Non calcareous brown soil
² Reddish brown latosol soil
² Red yellow podzolic soil
² Red yellow latosol soil
² Alluvial soil
² Solidex and Solonetz soil.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
How to use the soil:
² Red brown soil - It is found
only in the Dry Zone and
is suitable for cultivation
of dry crops and Chena
cultivation
² Non calcareous brown soil -
It is found in the interior
areas of Ampara , Batticaloa
and in the coastal areas.
is more suitable for
the cultivation of grains,
vegetables and grasses.
² Reddish
laterite
brown
soil - It is commonly found
in the Wet Zone. This is more
suitable for the cultivation
of tea, rubber, coffee, cocoa,
cardamoms, cloves and fruits.
Map 2.1 - Distribution of soils in Sri Lanka
² Red yellow podzolic soil - This soil is found in the districts that belong
to the low country wet zone. Tea, rubber, coconut are some permanent
crops which can be grown in this area. This is also suitable for growing
vegetables and fruits.
² Red yellow latosol soil - This can be seen in the land area from Putalam
to Mullaitivu along the North Western coast of the Dry Zone, and in
the Jaffna peninsula. This could be made suitable for fruit cultivation
successfully with the use of fertilizers and proper water supply.
² Alluvial soil - It is spread in river valleys and areas around them in the
wet and dry zones. It is commonly used for paddy cultivation.
² Solidex and Solonetz Soil - This kind of soil is abundantly found in
areas such as Damana and Tamankaduwa. Suitable for paddy and grasses.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Problems in utilization of soil and methods of conservation
Problems
Methods of conservation of soil.
² Severe soil erosion.
² Salinity of soil.
² Reduction of the capacity to retain
water in soil.
² Reduction of fertility due to over
exposure of land.
² Land
degradation
chemical Fertilizers, pesticides
and weedicides.
² Occurrence of natural disasters
such as floods and landslides.
² Effect on the ground water stores.
² Soil organisms get destroyed.
² Select
crops
following
agricultural
manage accordingly.
principles
² Regulating the use of fertilizer
and improving the consumption
of organic fertilizers.
² Cultivating cover crops.
² Turn over the soil according to
contour lines in slopes.
² Stripe cultivation method.
² Use crop residues as fertilizer.
² Use block and spill drains slit
drains and green fence. And the
use of stone ridges.
Activities
01. List the main kinds of rocks and write two examples for each type.
02. Name the main categories of soil in Sri Lanka and make a list of crops
that can be grown in each type of soil.
03. Mark the areas where those varieties of soil are spread in a map of Sri Lanka.
Minerals
Mineral resources can be introduced as a gift of nature. Graphite, gems,
clay, limestone and mineral sand are the main kinds of mineral in Sri Lanka.
These minerals and the products related to them are used at different
occasions in day to day life. Fig 2.4 shows some of the goods produced using
these minerals.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fig. 2 .4 - Products related to minerals.
Mineral resources
in Sri Lanka are of two
categories. They are
Metal minerals
Non - metal minerals.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Graphite
Sri Lanka is famous for high quality graphite since past. Graphite is mainly
exported and is used in following local industries.
² To produce paints
² Used in electric and electronic
² To make casting moulds
² To plate ovens
In the printing industry
industry
² To produce pencils
² To produce explosives
Kahatagaha and Kolongaha in Kurunegala district and Bogala in
Kegalle district are two main areas in Sri Lanka where graphite is found.
Kolonne, Bothale, Meegoda, Kahatagasdigiliya, Kebithigollawa, Akuressa,
is found.
Batapola and Deniyaya are
the other areas where graphite
Sri Lanka is famous for
gems since ancient times and it is
the type of material that brings
in the largest amount of foreign
currency to Sri Lanka. Gems
are unique because of their lustre,
colour and hardness. Sri Lanka has
different varieties of gems such
as rubies, sapphires , cat’s eye,
tourmaline etc. Which are highly
valuable. Uses of gems are;
² Used in making jewellery
Making watch bearings
² Making ornaments.
Fig. 2 .2 - The distribution of graphite and
gems in Sri Lanka
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
Mineral sands
01. Mark three areas where gems and
graphite are distributed in a map of Sri
Lanka marked with district boundaries.
02. Name the industries related to gems
and graphite industry and state the
benefits we can get by developing those
industries.
Mineral sands used as raw
materials for different industries
are found in abundance in the
coastal areas and river banks
in Sri Lanka. Silica, Ilmenite,
Zircon and Rutile are some of the
important mineral sands.
For free distribution
Fig. 2.2 - Distributing of mineral sands
For free distribution
Activities
01. Name four types of mineral sands in Sri Lanka.
02. Mark and name the areas where they are spread in a map of Sri Lanka.
03. Cite with examples and explain the importance of mineral sands as an
industrial raw material in Sri Lanka.
Problems in utilization of Mineral resources
² Environment pollution due to technical methods used in mining mineral
resources.
² Sand mining in river valleys would cause erosion of river banks, floods,
destruction of cultivation due to flow of salinized water to the interior
of the country.
² Pits are created due to mining and earth slips and landslides may occur too.
² Unused pits filled with water for a long time become breeding grounds for
mosquitos and bacteria.
² Floods occur due to deposition of sediments in rivers and lakes.
² Mining can be harmful to trees and plants in the environment, destruction of
cultivated lands, water, land and air pollution.
² Destruction of aquatic organisms and soil organisms.
Conservation of Mineral resources
Mineral resources should be conserved because they are exhaustible
resources. Steps taken to conserve mineral resources are as follows:
Issuing of licenses to regularize mineral mining.
² Taking the maximum use of the resources available.
² Regularizing laws for mining, using and transportation of minerals.
² Minimizing wastage when mining.
² Exploring to discover potential mineral resources.
Improving efficiency in technology.
Activities
01. Name the minerals used as industrial raw materials in Sri Lanka.
02.‘Mineral is a resource that should be conserved” . Give reasons for that.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Water
Sri Lanka is a country with abundant water resources. Sources of water in
Sri Lanka are mainly fed by rainfall. Sri Lanka receives rainfall from monsoons,
convectional rain and cyclones. The map in figure 2.4 shows the distribution of
average annual rainfall in Sri Lanka. It clearly shows that the amount of rainfall
varies in different places.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map 2.4 - Distribution of rainfall in Sri Lanka.
Main water resources in Sri Lanka are,
² Rivers, streams
² Tanks, reservoirs
² ground water (wells, springs, tube wells)
Rivers, streams and
canals
these rivers
Even though Sri
Lanka is a small island,
it has about 103 river
valleys (Map 2.5). Water
utilized to fulfil the basic
water
requirements
of the country. The
settlements
earliest
were established in
these river valleys to
obtain water for their
needs.
Tanks and
reservoirs
Attention was
paid on irrigation in the
dry zone, even in the
ancient times, due to
instability of rainfall and
drying up of the rivers
during the dry season.
Map 2.5 - Rivers in Sri Lanka
Many tanks were constructed in the Dry Zone in Sri Lanka as a
solution for the scarcity of water. Water collected during the rainy season
in these tanks is used during the dry season. Minneriya , Kavudulla,
Parakrama Samudra, Yoda wewa, Kala wewa and Nachchaduwa are
examples for some of the tanks in the dry zone. These tanks fulfill the
water requirements in those areas even at present.
Large reservoirs were constructed in the hill country wet zone
during recent times. Kothmale, Victoria, Randenigala and Rantambe are
some of them. Water in these reservoirs is not only used for agriculture,
but for many other purposes as well.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Ground water
Ground water is important in districts such as Jaffna, Kilinochchi,
Mannar, and Puttalam in Sri Lanka. Limestone deposits of these areas can
retain a large quantity of ground water. Ground water exists as deep basins.
Vanathavilluwa and Murukkan basins are the largest ground water deposits in the
island. Ground water can be utilized by agri wells, tube wells and Andiya
wells (a well with a counterpoise bucket lift. They are also known as "sweep
well.)
Uses of water
In agriculture.
² For drinking and household consumption.
² Generation of hydro – electricity.
² For recreational activities
² For industrial productions.
² As a medium of transport.
² For the fishing industry.
² To protect the balance of nature and to control the temperature.
Problems in utilization of water
² Water is a scarce resource.
² Waste of water.
² Pollution of water due to agriculture and industrial waste.
² Scarcity of pure drinking water.
² Breeding of pathogenic organisms in contaminated water.
² Problems in distribution of water during droughts.
² Pollution of water sources, salinization.
² Drying of springs, water pollution in tube wells.
Methods of conservation of water sources
Implement water management plans.
² Use water sparingly and minimize wastage.
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Protect water sources in the catchment areas.
² Construct large tanks and reservoirs.
² Provide proper irrigation to agricultural lands.
² Use of rainwater tanks. (Rainwater harvesting)
² Recycle water.
² Make people aware of the value of water.
² Minimize water pollution.
Regularize the method of releasing waste matter into the waterways
² Controlling floods.
² Design equipment like taps in a suitable way to help conservation of water.
Activities
01. Following are 10 main river valleys in Sri Lanka. Mark and name them
in a map of Sri Lanka.
Mahaweli river Yan Oya
Kelani river Walawe River
Deduru Oya Kumbukkan Oya Kalu ganga Ginganga
Malwatu Oya
Maduru oya
02. Explain the statement, “Water is an essential resource for survival of the
living organisms.
Forests in Sri Lanka
Many sub systems can be identified when we study the forests in Sri
Lanka. Following are those sub systems of forests.
Intermediate Evergreen Forests
² Tropical Rain Forests
² Dry Mixed Evergreen Forests
² Montane Dry Zone Forests
² Montane Wet Zone Forests
² Thorn and Scrubland (Arid Zone Forests)
² Mangroves
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fig. 2.5 – Distribution of forests in Sri Lanka
Tropical Rain Forests
² Distributed in the lower areas of the wet zone and in the hill country of Sri
Lanka . Dediyagala, Kanneliya, Nakiyadeniya, Ruhunu Kanda, Gilimale, Erathna
and Morapitiya are areas where these kinds of forests are found.
² Constant rainfall and a temperature favourable for the growth of plants throughout
the year is a special feature in these forests.
² Forests are dark green in colour and
trees are found in different layers. Under
growth is abundant. Hard wood trees can
also be seen among the other common
trees.
² Hora, Keena, Godapara, Kirihembiliya,
Batu Na, Milla, Midella Nedun, Davata
are some of the common trees in these
forests.
Fig. 2.6 - Tropical Rain Forests
For free distribution
For free distribution
Dry Mixed Evergreen Forests
² Distributed mainly in the dry zone
² The main rainy season is Northeast monsoon and trees grow during that
period.
² As trees grow during the rainy season and in certain kinds of trees, leaves
fall during the dry season, these forests are
Deciduous Forests.
² Trees of economic value such as
Satinwood, Ebony, Milla, Suriyamara,
Teak and Halmilla can be seen in these
forests in abundance.
Fig. 2.7 - Dry Mixed Ever Green
Forests
Intermediate Evergreen Forests
² Spreads along the transitional zone which separates the wet and dry zone.
² Trees of dry and wet zone are mixed up.
² The predominant types of trees are Jak, Bedidel, Pihimbiya, Mahogany,
Lunumidella.
Montane Wet Zone Forests
² Distributed in hill country wet zone
above 1200 m in height. Samanala,
Pidurutalagala, Horton plain, Knuckles
are some of the areas where these forests
are found.
² Height of
trees gradually decreases
according to the altitude of the land. Tree
tops grow as a canopy. Trees do not grow
thickly. Epiphytes are abundant on tree
trunks.
Fig. 2.8 - Montane wetzone Forests
² Sapu, Keena, Mihiriya, Waldel, Vellan, Mora, Hulan hik are some of the
predominant types of trees in these forests.
Montane Dry Zone Forests
² Distributed in hilly areas over 1400m in height.
² Horton plains, Moon plains, Seethaeliya, Ambewela, Kandapola are some of
the areas these forests are found in abundance.
² A significant feature is 'Patanas' or grasslands as a result of less rainfall. The
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
trunks and the branches of the trees
are twisted so that they are resistant
to strong winds prevalent in these
areas. Trees are scattered about in the
grasslands.
² Maharathamal, Aralu, Bula, Nelli,
Domba, Gurukeena and Kahata are
some predominant types of trees found
in these forests.
Thorn and Scrubland
² These are found in the Northwestern
and South Eastern regions.
² The average
temperature is above
27c. Therefore plants are adapted to
withstand droughts. Thorny trees with
pointed and thick leaves can be seen
(cactus).
² Palu, Weera, Eraminiya, Karamba,
Suriya are examples for the types of
trees that can be seen in abundance in
these forests.
Fig. 2.9 - Montane Dry Zone Forests
Mangroves
Fig. 2.10 - Thorn and Scrubland
² These are distributed in the coastal
areas near rivers, river mouths and
lagoons.
² A distinctive feature of mangroves is
their far-reaching, exposed roots.
² Kadol, Kirala, Diyakaduru, Ginpol are
some species of trees abundantly found.
Wildlife reserves
Fig. 2.11 - Mangroves
Animals in the forests are an important part of the bio-diversity. Forest
reserves are declared to protect eco systems and fauna, to preserve natural beauty
For free distribution
For free distribution
and to provide opportunities for scientific research. Following are some types of
reserves.
National Parks
² Sanctuaries
² Forest reserves
National Parks
• Strict natural reserves
• Natural reserves
There are about 20 national parks in Sri Lanka. Yala, Wilpattu,
Gal oya, Kumana, Udawalawa, Vasgamuwa, Lunugam Vehera, Maduru Oya,
Somawathie, Horton Plains, Bundala, Minneriya are some of them. The wildlife
is completely protected in these national parks. The public can observe the
wildlife and the natural environment. Provisions for scientific study are also
provided.
Strict Natural Reserves
Haggala, Yala and Ritigala are three of the strict natural reserves.
Human activities are restricted in these reserves. Wildlife resources are solely
owned by the government and the public is permitted to enter these areas only
for scientific research purposes.
Sanctuaries
It is an area reserved for the protection of wildlife. There are about
62 sanctuaries in Sri Lanka. Weeravilla, Kataragama, Kaudulla, Minneriya,
Udawatta Kale, Wilapattu, Gal Oya, Trincomalee, Madhu road, Ravana Ella,
Victoria, Randenigala, Rantambe, Sigiriya, Bellanvilla, Madunagala are
some of the main sanctuaries in Sri Lanka. Sanctuaries are not under severe
restrictions. Human activities are permitted in such a way to protect wildlife
and their natural habitats.
Nature Reserves
Thriconamadhu, Minneriya, Giritale, Wetahiriyakanda are some of the
Nature Reserves in Sri Lanka. The government assures protection of living and
non- living resources in these areas. Public cannot enter these areas without
permission of the government.
Forest Reserves
Knuckles, Sinharaja, Kanneliya, Dediyagala and Nakiyadeniya are
some of the main forest reserves.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
(Naval Base)
For free distribution
Fig. 2.6 - Forest Reserves in Sri Lanka
Source - The National Map collection of Sri Lanka 2007
For free distribution
Uses of forests and forest reserves
² They protect bio- diversity.
² Provides a sanctuary for wildlife.
² Provides an opportunity for the public to observe rare wildlife.
² Springs and catchment areas are conserved.
² Prevent the increase of environmental temperature.
² They act as a gene pool.
² Provide commercial products such as resin, wax, paraffin, kithul treackle
It is a source that provides food and medicine.
and bee honey.
² Prevent environment pollution.
² Absorb Carbon dioxide.
² Provision of timber to build houses and to make furniture. Provide firewood
to be used as a fuel.
² Give shade, coolness, beautify nature and give mental relief.
² Act as a buffer for soil erosion and conserve soil.
² Storms, earth slips and floods are controlled.
Activities
01' Mark and name two National parks, Strict Natural Reserves, Sanctuaries,
Natural reserves and Forest reserves in a map of Sri Lanka.
02' Create a folder about forests in Sri Lanka under the following topics.
² Distribution of forests
² Nature of trees and plants
² Significance of forests and wildlife in Sri Lanka
Steps taken to conserve forests
Threats to the existence of forests have increased in line with increase in
population and their escalating needs. Deforestation that occur along with the
increase in population has adverse effects on climate, environment, and human
life and on wild life too. Therefore following steps were taken to conserve
forests and wild life.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Maintaining National Reserves and Sanctuaries.
² Following forest conservation strategies (SALT method, conserve wet lands,
Implementing forest plantation projects.
conserve mangroves).
² Encouraging public participation in a forestation.
² Planting trees and increase the productivity of forests.
² Making people aware of the effects of destruction of forests.
² Maintenance of Environmentally Sensitive Zones.
² Protecting forest resources and enforcing the existing laws.
Energy Power
There are several sources used
to generate energy power,
² Bio- mass
Imported petroleum
Water
² Coal
² Wind
² Solar energy
Graph 2.1 - Use of Energy use in Sri Lanka
Source - http://www.info.energy.gov.lk/2015/04/23
Graph 2.1 shows how these sources of power produce energy in Sri Lanka.
According to the graph; it is evident that bio-mass and petroleum are used more
than the other sources of energy.
Bio- mass
Timber, Agri waste, animal waste and bio gas are the main bio-mass
energy sources used in Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka uses fire wood in abundance like
many of the other developing countries. Fire wood from home gardens, fire wood
from coconut cultivations, rubber wood, wood from natural forests and forest
cultivations are used as fuel. Other than the above sources, saw dust, paddy husks,
fiber waste of sugarcane, charcoal and charcoal obtained from coconut shells are
also used as fuel.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Solar energy
Solar energy can be produced
easily in Sri Lanka as it is located in the
tropical region which gets constant sun
light. Sri Lanka has recently established
a solar power station at Baruthakanda in
Hambanthota .Other than that solar cells
and solar panels are used for producing
energy for domestic use. The high capital
required to be invested initially to obtain solar power is a challenge to a
developing country like Sri Lanka. However it is a source of energy which
immensely helps to reduce environmental pollution.
Fig. 2.12 - Solar panel
Wind energy
Wind is an important source of
energy as it is a non-exhaustible resource.
Similar to the way of utilizing solar energy
wind power too requires a higher initial
capital. But it causes the minimum level
of environmental pollution. Puttalam and
Hambanthota are the areas where wind
power stations are located in Sri Lanka.
They supply power to small scale industries
Petroleum
Fig. 2.13 - Wind Mills
Petroleum is an important source of energy which is imported. Imported
crude oil is being purified at Sapugakanda and is distributed throughout the
country by the Kolonnawa stores. Petrol, Diesel, L.P. Gas, Jet fuel, Fuel oil
and Kerosene oil are extracted from crude oil. Graph 2.2 shows how petroleum
is consumed in Sri Lanka. According to this graph it is clear that petroleum is
used mostly in transportation, industries and commercial activities.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
The demand for energy
increasing day by day in Sri Lanka.
"Sustainable Energy Authority"
established to fulfil this demand and
to concentrate on producing low cost
energy generation. Attention is paid to
establish small scale energy projects in
the rural areas. In addition to the above,
energy power is produced at the coal
power stations in Kerawalaptiya and
Norochcholai.
Hydro electricity
Hydro electricity
is mostly
used for domestic,
industrial and
commercial activities in Sri Lanka.
Only 2000 mega watts can be produced
in hydro power stations
in Sri
Lanka. Lakshapana,Wimalasurendra,
Samanala, Canyon, Randenigala,
Kothmale, Victoria, Ukuwela are
some hydro power stations which
produce 1200 mega watts up to now.
Graph 2.2 - Use of petroleum
Source - Anuual report 2013 Ministry of Finance
and Planning
The demand for electricity
increases annually by 7% - 8% in Sri
Lanka. Increase in the population, rise
in consumer needs and development in
industries have affected this increase
in demand for energy. Graph 2.2
shows the consumption of electricity
in Sri Lanka. According to this graph,
there is a high demand for domestic
activities and industries.
Graph 2.3 - Use of hydro power
Source - http://www.info.energy.gov.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fig. 2.7 - Hydro Power Station in Sri Lanka
Source - Gunasena Philhips Atlas (2003)
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Problems in consumption of energy sources
² High cost.
² Some of the energy sources like wind and solar power depends on
environmental
factors and a high initial cost has to be spent.
² A high cost is spent for importing crude oil.
² More wastage in consumption of energy.
² Breakdowns due to natural hazards.
Importance of the conservation of energy resources
² Saves foreign currency that we spend on importing crude oil.
² Contribution to the development of the country.
² Contribution to the education and social activities.
² Consumption of energy sources sparingly would help to fulfill high
demands. It would also contribute towards sustainable development.
² Efficiency in daily activities of the consumers saves time and minimizes
the waste of money.
² Minimize environmental destruction.
² Minimize the effects of natural hazards and climatic changes.
Activity
1. Name three energy sources used mostly in Sri Lanka.
2. Mark and name the following things on a map of Sri Lanka.
² Five main hydro power stations
² Two wind power stations
² A coal power station
3. “We can contribute to the development of the country by using energy power
sparingly” Explain this statement with examples.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Assignments
1. List three problems related to consumption of land in your area.
2. Design a leaflet including methods that can be followed to solve those
problems.
(i) Name some of the mineral resources in your area and
prepare a table and write their uses.
(ii) Find information about the advance effects of extracting and using
those mineral resources on the environment.
(i) Collect data on problems related to consumption of water in your area.
(ii) Suggest remedies to solve those problems.
5. Plan and implement an activity to use the water wasted in the school
premises with the help of your teacher.
(i) To which sub system are the forests in your area belong?
(ii) Write three special features of those forests.
7. Collect data on natural resources in your area. Make a handout to show the
uses gained at present and uses that can be gained in future.
Bibliography and sources
² .=Kfiak ms,smaia f,dal is;shï fmd; ^2003& iS$i weï' ã' .=Kfiak iy
iud.u
² Annual Report (2013), Ministry of Finance and Planning
² http: //www.info.energy.gov.lk
² Y%S ,xld cd;sl is;shï ix.%yh" 2007" Y%S ,xld ñkskafodare fomd¾;fïka;=j"
fld<U'
² n,Yla;sh oefha Ôjkd,sh hs .%ka:h ^2015&" iqks;H n,Yla;s wêldßh
Glossary
² Maritime boundary
- uqyqÿ iSudj
- PhÀ GÀø»
² Nautical miles
- kdúl ie;mqï
- PhÀ ø©À
Territorial Maritime boundary - rdIaà%h uqyqÿ iSudj
- Bm¦» PhÀ GÀø»
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Historic waters
- ft;sydisl c, m%foaYh
- Áµ»õØÖ }öµÀø»
Land use
- N+ñ mßyrKh
- {»¨ £¯ß£õk
² Consumption patterns
- mßyrK rgd
- ~PºÄ¨ £õ[SPÒ
Scrub lands
- ,÷ le<E
- £ØøÓU PõkPÒ
Terraced method
- fy,au¿ l%uh
- £iUPmk •øÓ
² Corals
- fldr,a
- •¸øPU PÀ
² Coral reefs
- ysß.,a mr
- •¸øPU PØ£õº
² Replant
- m%;sfrdamKh
- «ß |køP
Steps
- msh.egfm<
- £iUPmkPÒ
² Guard stones
- fodrgqmd, rEm
- PõÁÀ PÀ
² Miocene limestones
- ufhdaiSk yqKq.,a
- ©÷¯õ^ß _snU PÀ
² Rock excavation
- mdIdK lekSu
- £õøÓ APÌÄ
² Vibration
- lïmkh
- AvºÄ
Soil development process
- mdxY= j¾Ok l%shdj,sh
- ©s Â¸zva ö\¯ß•øÓ
² River valley
- .x.d ñáhdj;
- BØÖ¨ £ÒÍzuõUS
² River mouth
- .xfudah
- BØÖ •P®
² Cover crop
- wdjrK fNda.
- ‰k £°º
Stripe cultivation method
- ;Sre j.d l%uh
- £iUPmk £°ºaö\´øP •øÓ
² Block drain mowing
- l=Üá ldKq lemSu
- PõÀÁõ¯ öÁmkuÀ
² Copper
- ö\®¦
² Magnesium
- ue.akSishï
- ©UÜ]¯®
Ilmenite
- b,aukhsÜ - CÀ©øÚØ
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Rutile
- rEghs,a
- ¹øh°À
² Magnetite
- ue.akghsÜ
- ©UÚøµØÖ
² Graphite
Limestone
² Clay
² Apatite
Silica
- ñksrka
- yqKq.,a
- ueá
- wemghsÜ
- is,sld
- PõŸ¯®
- _snU PÀ
- PÎ©s
- A¨£øuØ
- ]¼UPõ
Sediments / silt
- frdka uv
- Aøh¯ÀPÒ
² Aquatic organisms
- c,c Ôùka
- }º\õº A[QPÒ
Soil organisms
- mdxY= Ôùka
- ©s A[QPÒ
² Water basins
- c,føda‚
- }º Ái{»®
Tube wells
- k, <sx
- SÇõ´ QnÖ
Sweep wells / Andia wells - wdçhd <sx
- BÇ©ØÓ QnÖPÒ
Tropical rain forests
- ksj¾;k f;;a jkdka;r
- A¯Ú ©øÇU PõkPÒ
² Dry mixed ever green forests - úh<s ñY% iodyß; jkdka;r
- GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ Áµsh
P»¨¦U PõkPÒ
Intermediate evergreen forests - w;rueÈ iodyß; jkdka;r
- GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ
Cøh{ø»U PõkPÒ
² Montane dry zone forests
- l÷lr úh<s l,dmSh jkdka;r - ö©õ¢uõøÚ E»º Á»¯U
PõkPÒ
² Wet montane forests
- l÷lr f;;a l,dmSh jkdka;r - Dµ ö©õ¢uõøÚU PõkPÒ
Thorny bushes and scrublands - lgq m÷re yd ,÷ le<E
- •m¦uºPÐ®, £ØøÓU
PõkPÐ®
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Mangroves
- lfvd,dk
- PshÀPÒ
² Rainy season
- j¾Id iD;=j
- ©øÇ¨ £¸Á®
Transitional Zone
- l%dka;s l,dmh
- ©õÓÀ Á»¯®
² National park
- cd;sl WoHdkh
- ÷u]¯ §[Põ
Strict natural reserve areas - oeä iajdNdúl rlaIs; - uøhö\´¯¨£mh JxUS¨ £SvPÒ
Sanctuary
- wNhN+ñh
- \µnõ»¯®
² Natural reserves
- iajdNdúl rlaIs;
- C¯ØøP JxUSPÒ
Forest reserves
- jk rlaIs;
- ÁÚ JxUS
² Gene pool
- cdk ixÑ;
- ©µ£q
Storms
- iq<x l=Kdgq
- ¦¯ÀPÒ
Tree culture
- rela frdamKh
- ©µ|køP
Environmentally sensitive zones - mßir ixfõ§ l,dm - `ÇÀ EnºvÓß Á»¯®
² Bio mass
- ffcj ialkaO
- E°º voÄ
Solar energy
- iQ¾h Yla;sh
- `›¯ \Uv
Solar power stations
- iQ¾h n,d.dr
- `›¯ Á¾ {ø»¯®
Solar cells
- iQ¾h fldaI
- `›¯U P»[PÒ
Solar panel
- iQ¾h mek,h
- `›¯ öuõSv
² Generation of electricity
- úÿ,sh ckkh lsÍu
- ªß E¸ÁõUP®
Energy Authority
- n,Yla;s wêldßh
- ªß \Uv BønU SÊ
² Coal power station
- .,a wÕ=re n,d.drh
- {»UP› Á¾ {ø»¯®
Sustainable existence
- ;srir meje;au
- {ø»¯õÚ ÁõÌÄ vÓß
For free distribution
For free distribution
Scientific names of the trees in Sri Lankan forests mentioned in
Unit 2
² Hora
² Keena
- Dipterocarpus zeylanicus
- Callophylum tomentosum
² Halmilla
- Berrya cordifolia
² Kirihambiliya
- Palaquium grande
² Milla
² Nadun
- Vitex altissima
- Pericopsis mooniana
Pihibiya
- Filicium decipiens
² Lunumidella
- Melia azedarach
² Nelli
- Michelia champaca
- Phyllanthus emblica
- Manilkara hexandra
² Karamba
- Carissa carandas
Suriya
- Thespesia populnea
² Eraminiya
- Ziziphus rugosa
² Mora
- Dimocarpus longan
² Kaluwara
- Diospyrus ebenum
² Burutha
- Chloroxylon swietenia
² Teak
- Tectonia grandis
Suriya mara
- Albizia odoratissima
² Badi del
- Artocarpus nobilis
² Hulan hik
- Chukrasia tabularis
² Mihiriya
- Gordonia ceylanica
² Maha rath mal
- Rhodendron arboreum
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Aralu
² Bulu
- Terminalia chebula
- Terminalia bellirica
² Domba
- Callophylum innophylum
² Guru keena
- Calophyllum calaba
² Kadol
² Kirala
- Rhizophora mucronata
Sonneratia caseolaris
² Diya kaduru
- Cerbera manghas
² Gin pol
- Nypa futicans
² Welan
- Pterospermum suberifolium
² Midella
- Barringtonia racemosa
² Dawata
- Carallia brachiata
² Kahata
² Veera
- Careya arborea
Drypetes sepiaria
For free distribution
For free distribution
The World Population
The total number of humans inhabiting the earth is termed population
Fig. 3.1 - Population
Population is defined as a phenomenon that changes qualitatively and
quantitatively.
The main objective of this lesson is to find out information regarding the
size of population, its growth and distribution.
When population is considered two important aspects can be identified,
² Features such as gender, human race and age that receive at birth.
² Features such as nationality, religion, language and literacy that are received
later.
Man who determines or consumes all physical resources on the earth is a
resource. Accordingly, in any country human resource is very important within the
development process. It is so because all activities of the world is based on man.
The population of the world is growing fast. The accelerated growth of population
in some countries is a problem and in others, the lower growth of population is also
a problem. In developing countries the growth of population is relatively faster
than in developed countries. Hence it is important that the population has to be
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
maintained at the optimum level in any country, within the development process.
For this purpose, it is seen that in every country, various strategies and plans are
prepared and also population polices are followed. Hence “population” has become
a very important topic in geographical studies.
The size of world population
Over 200 years ago, the world population has been very low, however, at
present the world population has risen beyond seven billion. Gradually according to
the rate that population growth increases, it can be calculated that around 80 million
people would be added to the world population.
Graph 3.1 The World Population size (prepared according to continents)
Source – http://world population rewiew.com/continents 2014.12.03
Graph 3.1 Shows the distribution of population in the continents. According
to this graph;
around 76%of the total world population lives in the two continents of
Asia and Africa. 24%, comprising the rest, is distributed among other
countries. There are around 23 countries which have a population of over a
100 million. The 10 countries which have the largest populations is shown
in table 3.1.
² China and India in Asia are homes to a huge population. Besides, high
populations are found in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Indonesia.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Table -3.1 Population according to the numerical strength
Country
Population
Percentage
China
India
U.S.A
Indonesia
Brazil
Pakistan
Nigeria
Bangladesh
Russia
Japan
1"393"783"836
1"267"401"849
322"583"006
252"812"245
202"033"670
185"132"926
178"516"904
158"512"570
142"467"651
126"999"808
19'24
17'50
Source - http://www.worldometers.info/2015.07.20
The Growth of World Population
Though the history of human race that inhabited the world runs to over a
million years, definite data about population have not been found prior to last 200
years.
Some conclusions have been arrived at, by means of archaeological evidence
about the early period. Even during this period by examining the data it becomes
clear that there has been a continuous growth of the world population.
When the historical data regarding world population, two distinguishable periods
can be identified.
1. A long period of time between the origin of mankind to around 1750 when the
growth was slow.
During a long period of time due to the rate of natural growth being at a low
level, the world population did not develop fast. The reason behind this is the
fact that though the birth ratio was high, the mortality ratio too remained high.
See graph 3.2.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Graph 3.2 - How world population grew
Source - http://singularity.com/wp/_contend/uphold/2011/09/image2.jpg 2015.07
Within the short period after 1750 AD, There was an accelerated growth of
population. During this period of time the mortality rate became low but the birth
rate remained high, leading to an accelerated growth in population. This is known
as the population explosion.
Table 3.2 Rapid Growth in Population
Population in millions
1"000
1"200
1"600
2"550
4"000
4"850
5"700
6"500
6"800
7"000
Source – http://geography.about.com 2015.07.22
For free distribution
For free distribution
Graph 3.3 – The time taken for the growth of world population from billion to billion
Source - http://www.usfunds.com/media/images 2014.12.06
The world population which was a billion in 1800 had reached seven billion
in AD in 2011. According to graph 3.3 it is clear, that gradually the time taken for
growth of population to near a billion became less and at the present time it has only
taken a short period of time like 12 years for the population to double. It is expected
for the world population to reach 11 billion at the end of this century.
Another special
feature of the growth
of world population is
the fact that during the
period after 1950, the
population growth in
developing countries
shows a faster rate
the developed
countries (graph 3.4).
Graph 3.4 Growth of world Population
Source - http://www.sustainablescale.org/images/ 2015.07.20
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
01' i' Name the two identifiable periods in the growth of world population.
ii' Explain clearly the factors that led to the differences in population growth
during those two periods.
02' i' State what is meant by “Population explosion” explain the factors that affected
the “population explosion” in developing countries.
ii' Study graph 3.4 and explain the differences between the population growth
in developed and developing countries.
Distribution of World Population
How humans have spread geographically on the surface of the earth is known
as population distribution. There are only a few regions on the earth which are
physically congenial to human habitation. Due to the diversity in physical and human
factors and unequal distribution is visible. Accordingly, there are densely populated
regions and sparsely populated regions on the earth’s surface.
Population that inhabits a certain unit of
land is defined as population density.
Generally it is shown as “number of people
per square kilometre”.
Population density = Population
Four densely populated
regions can be identified
² East Asia
² South and South East Asia
² North West Europe
Land area
² North East Costal
Zone of U.S.A
The North Eastern coastal zone of the U.S.A which is identified as a densely
populated region has become a secondary concentration at world level at present.
All these population concentration, being found in coastal regions is a special
feature. There are factors which contribute towards this feature of people crowding
into these places. Physical surroundings congenial to human habitation, transport
facilities and factors that are suitable for trade and other economic activities are
some of those factors that have made people crowd to those places. A large number
of million cities (cities that have a population over a million) are located within
these zones.
It is only 10% of the land of the world that cover this population concentration but
that 64% of the world population live within these concentrations is a special feature.
For free distribution
For free distribution
World Population distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Secondary World population concentrations
In addition to these population concentrations, there are also many
secondary population concentrations with a high density of population in almost all
the countries.
² Eastern Western and North Eastern coastal concentration of North America
(linked to the cities of New York, Sanfrancisco and Boston).
² The Eastern Coastal concentration of South America (linked to Rio de
Janeiro in Brazil.
² Zone around the Nile Estuary (linked to the city of Cairo in Egypt).
² Concentration of Sierra Leone, Liberia, Ivory Cost and Ghana in Western
Africa
About 80% of the world population lives in the above mentioned densely
populated areas They have a population density more than 65 persons per
square kilometer.
Sparsely populated regions of the world
Out of the total land area of the world, 65% of the land area has a low
population.
² Cold deserts (Antarctic and Arctic region)
² Hot deserts (Sahara in the African continent, and Central Australia).
Mountainous regions (Himalayas, Andes; Rockies etc.)
² Tropical Rainforest Regions (Amazon, Congo)
In these regions the population density is less than five persons per square
kilometer. Physical factors like rugged relief and climate has brought about this condition.
Except for the densely populates areas and the sparsely populated areas, the
other areas of the world have an average distribution of people. In these regions the
population density is between 5 - 65 persons per square kilometer.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Factors that contribute towards the unequal distribution of
population
There are many factors that have contributed for the unequal distribution of
population. These factors can be divided into two categories;
1. Physical factors
2. Human factors
Physical factors
The physical factors that affect population distribution are the following;
Climate
² physical features
² Drainage
Variations in the climate on the earth have positively and negatively affected
the population distribution in the world. Plains, river valleys and places with fertile soil
with a tropical or a temperate climate have become areas with a high population. The
Nile valley and the Indus valley are examples for such regions.
The land in the Polar Regions where the temperature is low, and the climate is
extremely cold, the arid regions where there is a high temperature and a very low rainfall,
and regions where there is a high temperature and heavy rainfall like the Amazon and
the Congo Basins are areas of low population.
The nature of the terrain is also an important geographic feature determining
population distribution. When the terrain consists of a rugged relief, the area is sparsely
populated. For instance, in a mountainous region, population density is low. Areas
around Himalayas, Andes and Rockies can be shown as examples. In addition to these,
distribution of natural resources and natural vegetation are also factors that affect
population distribution.
Human as well as physical factors have affected population distribution. Location
of different industrial centers, urbanization, trade canters and ports, development of
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
infrastructure, availability of diverse services and establishment of administrative
activities are also important human factors that affect population distribution.
The effects of the above factors are minimized with the development in scientific
knowledge and technology.
Activities
1. Mark and name the main world population concentration zones and secondary
concentration on an outline map of the world.
2. What factors have caused the unequal population distribution in the world?
Describe with examples.
3. Name a million city each for the high density population conglomerates.
4. Prepare a list including problems related to high population concentration
zones.
Assignment
Prepare a graph to show how the world population developed throughout history
to date.
Bibliography and Sources
² http://worldpopulationreview.com/continents
² http://singularityhub.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/image2.jpg
² http://www.usfunds.com/media/images/frank-talk-images/2011-frank-talk/
jul-dec-2011/WorldPop-7billion-102811.gif
² http://www.sustainablescale.org/images/uploaded/Population
² http://www.prb.org/images12/world-trends.gif
² United Nations, World population prospects, the 1998-Revi.Population
Reference Bureau, population data sheet 2011
² http://education.randmcnally.com/images/edpub/World_Population.png
² http://www. worldmeters info/world. population/population-by-countryl
² http://geography.about.com/od/obtain population data /a/ world population.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Glossary
² Gender
Literacy
- mqñ;sßnj
- £õ¼Ú
- idlaIr;dj
- GÊzuÔÄ
² Development process
- ixj¾Ok l%shdj,sh
- A¤Â¸zva ö\¯ß•øÓ
² Optimum level
- m%Yia; uÜgu
- Ezu© ©mh®
² Archaeological evidences
- mqrdúoHd;aul idlaIs
- öuõÀ¼¯À \õßÖPÒ
² Historical data
- ft;sydisl o;a;
- Áµ»õØÖz uµÄPÒ
Population explosion
- ckixLHd iafMdagkh
- Siz öuõøP öÁi¨¦
Earth’s surface
- mDÓú ;,h
- ¦Â ÷©Ø£µ¨¦
Population density
- ck>k;ajh
- Siz öuõøP Ahºzv
Population concentration zones - ck ixflakaøK l,dm - SizöuõøP Tmk Á»¯[PÒ
Secondary concentration
- oaú;Shsl ixflakaøK
- Cµshõ® {ø»U Tmk
Sparsely populated regions - ck ySk m%foaY
- SøÓÁõÚ SizöuõøP¨
¤µ÷u\[PÒ
² Rugged relief
- r¿ úIu;dj
- Pµk•µhõÚ uøµz÷uõØÓ®
² Diversity of climate
- foaY.=K úúO;ajh
- Põ»{ø»¨ £ÀÁøPø©
² Arid regions
- Y=Ial m%foaY
- Áµsh ¤µ÷u\[PÒ
² Accessibility
- iq.u;dj
- \©©õÚ uøµ¯ø©¨¦
Location of industry
- l¾udka; ia:dk.;ùu
- øPzöuõÈÀ Aø©Âh®
² Urbanization
- kd.ÍlrKh
- |PµõUP®
Infrastructure facilities
- há;, myiqlï
- Em Pmk©õÚ Á\vPÒ
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
The Population of Sri Lanka
Data regarding the population of Sri Lanka is collected by the Department
of Census and Statistics after conducting a survey on population and housing. The
first formal census was conducted in 1871 and generally, a census is carried out
once in every ten years.
Although Sri Lanka is a developing country, when certain qualitative features
like the Infant Mortality Rate, Maternal Mortality Rate, Life Expectancy and Literacy
are considered, it shows features of a developed country. Therefore, when compared to
the other developing countries, Sri Lanka remains at a special position. The progress in
Education and Health sectors has greatly contributed to this situation.
The main objective of this lesson is to study about the population, the
size of the population, the growth of population, the distribution of the
population, the composition of population and the population structure.
Size of the Population
In 2012 the population of Sri Lanka was around 20.2 million. According
to the census data, the density of Sri Lankan population is 323 persons per square
kilometer.
When compared to other countries in the South Asian zone, Sri Lanka holds
the 5th position in the size of population. However, a similar comparison shows that
Sri Lanka has the lowest rate of population growth (observe table 4.1).
Table 4.1 - The Population, Population density and the Average Annual Growth of the
population in South Asian countries (2013).
country
India
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Nepal
Sri Lanka
Bhutan
Maldives
Population
(millions)
1.252
Population density
per km2
The general annual
growth rate
Source ( un Population chart, 2013, www.unpoulation.org
For free distribution
For free distribution
Population Growth
Population growth
is the growth of population
within a specific unit of
land. The census reports of
Sri Lanka from 1871 show
that there is a continuous
growth in population. The
population of Sri Lanka
which was 2.4 million
according to the first census
in 1871 has risen up to 20.2
million in 2012. The continuous growth of population in Sri Lanka is depicted in graph
4.1. Table 4.2 shows the average annual growth rate, and the population growth
during the inter-census period from 1871-2012.
Graph 4.1 - Population growth according to census years
Source - Population and housing data, Department of population and statistics 2012
Table 4.2 population of Sri Lanka and the Average
Annual Growth rate (1871 – 2012)
Census years Population The average
annual year
2,400,380
2,759,738
3,007,739
3,565,954
4,106,350
4,498,605
5,306,871
6,657,339
8,097,895
10,582,064
12,689,895
14,846,750
18,797,257
20,277,597
population
Table 4.1 and graph 4.2
show that the rate of population
growth has changed although
grown
continuously since the first census.
During the period from 1871 AD
to 1946 AD, the population has
grown at a slow pace, but the
growth rate has accelerated after
1946. The highest rate of growth
that is 2.8 was reported during
the years 1946 – 53. The rate
has gradually decreased to 0.7
in 2012. Decline in the natural
growth and emigration cause the
decline in population growth.
Source – Population and housing census report 2012,
based on department of population and statistics.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Graph 4.2 - The Ratio Differences In The Annual Population Growth Rate.
Source - Population and housing data, Department of population and statistics 2012
There are provincial differences related to population growth in Sri Lanka.
The population growth in Sri Lanka is relatively higher in the districts of the Dry
Zone than in the Wet Zone districts. Though the average growth rate of population
in Sri Lanka is 0.7% the birth rate in Anuradhapura District is 1.33,in Hambanthota
it is 1.17% and in the Monaragala District it is 1.15%.In the Wet Zone we can
observe a lower rate of population growth. In Colombo it is 0.35%, in Nuwara Eliya
it is 0.05% and in Badulla it is 0.39%. However, a higher population growth can be
seen in Kaluthara and Gampaha districts in the Wet Zone, recording a rate of 1.23%
and 1.02% respectively. According to the census reports, proximity to the Colombo
district and migrations have affected the higher rates of population in these two
districts.(http://www.statistics.gov.lk/17/06/2015)
Activity
1. prepare a bar-graph to show the size of population in the South Asian
countries referring to the data given in table 4.1.
2. What are the temporal trends seen in population growth in Sri Lanka from
1871 to date?
3. Describe the provincial differences in population growth giving examples.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Population Distribution
The population distribution of Sri Lanka shows an unequal nature. When
the population distribution in the provinces is considered, more than 1/4of the
total population, around 28.8% of the population, is concentrated in the Western
Province. A high population distribution is found in the Central Province (12.6%)
Southern Province (12.2%) and in North Eastern Province (11.7%) too. The lowest
population distribution, 5.2%, is found in the Northern province. (Graph 4.3)
Graph 4.3- Population Distribution in the Provinces
Source – Population and housing census data, Department of Population and Census 2012.
The Colombo District has the highest population with a population of 2,323,826
according to the census conducted in 2012.
Many factors have affected the high population,such as accumulation of
commercial and administrative operations, educational activities and services in this
district. There is a very large population in the Gampaha District too (2,298,588).
Migration to the Biyagama and Katunayake Free Trade Zones and selecting Gampaha
as a convenient residential area due to easy access to Colombo are the main reasons for
this relatively high population. Besides Colombo and Gampaha Districts, Kurunegala
(1,611,407), Kandy (1,368,216), Kalutara (1,214,880), Rathnapura (1,082,299) and
Galle (1,059,046 ) are the other districts with a high population. The population in
these districts exceeds one million. Mullativu, Mannar, Killinochchi and Vauniya
districts in the Northern Province record a very low population.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map 4.1 - Population dencity in Sri Lanka
Source - http://i.imgur.com/lfSi1.jpg 2015.07.20
The Mulativu District has the lowest population which is 92,228.
The distribution of population can be clearly identified by the population
density.
According to the census the average density of population is 323, but in
certain districts there is high density of population while in certain other districts
the population density is extremely low. Map 4.1 shows the population density of
Sri Lanka in 2012.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
1. Observe Map 4.1 and write down three districts which have the highest
population and three districts which have the lowest population.
2. (i) On an outline map of Sri Lanka, shade the districts which contains the
highest population and the lowest population.
(ii) Explain clearly the reasons for the uneven distribution of population.
3. Mention three measures that could be taken to minimize the inequalities in
the distribution of population in Sri Lanka.
The population distribution in Sri Lanka can also be classified as urban,
rural and plantation population .According to the graph 4.4,the rural population is
77.3%, the urban population is 18.3% and the plantation population is 4.4%
Population Composition
Sri Lanka is a multi-ethnic
and multi-religious country. The
population in Sri Lanka is divided
into five
categories; Sinhala,
Sri Lankan Tamils, Indian Tamils,
Moors and others. Malays, Burghers
and Europeans represent others. The
main religious communities are the
Buddhist, Hindu, Islam and Christian
communities. Graphs 4.5 and 4.6
depict
religious
composition in the population.
the ethnic and
Graph 4.4 - Distribution of Population in Rural ,
Urban and Plantation areas
Source – Population and housing data population
and statistics department 2012
Even though different ethnic and religious communities represent the
whole population, they all are Sri Lankans.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Graph 4.5. Ethnic Composition
Graph 4.6 Religious Composition in the
population 2012
Source – Socio Economic data of Sri Lanka 2013
Population Structure
The population structure of a place shows how the population is divided
up between males and females of different age groups. According to the 2012
census report age and gender structures are shown below.
Population according to age
Population according to gender
< 15 yrs - 25.8%
Between 15 -59 - 62.0%
> 60 yrs - 12.2%
Male - 48.5%
Female - 51.5%
Special features of the population in Sri Lanka
A special feature in the Sri Lankan population is the gradual decrease of
young people and the gradual increase of the elderly people. When the popula-
tion of people over 59 years of age in a country or region rises due to increased
life expectancy and declining birth rate it is called the population aging. This
results the gradual decline of the labour force. Sri Lanka, along with many other
countries in the world is facing the challenge of population aging. In the same
manner the percentage of women in the population has also increased.
By studying the age structure according to gender, we can find information
regarding the labour force, the number of women who are capable to have children
and the number of dependents.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
1. According to the data of 2012 census , what special features of the
Sri Lankan population can be identified?
2. “Like many other countries in the world, Sri Lanka is also facing the
population aging problem”.
Explain what is meant by the term ‘aging population’ and what are the
problems a country would face relating to that?
3. Show by means of graphs the ethnic and religious composition of the
population of Sri Lanka.
Bibliography and Sources
² Department of population and statistics - Population and Housing Sensus
Report - 2012
² Socio Economic Data of Sri Lanka (2013). The central Bank of Sri Lanka.
² un population chart, 2013, www.unpopulation org
² http://i. imgur.com / ifsil. jpg2015/06/22
² http : //www statistics. gov. lk/Pop/ Housal/ CPH2011/Pages.sm/CPH% 20
2011-R1.Pdf
Glossary
² Department of
- ck yd ixLHd f,aLk
- öuõøP©v¨¦ ¦ÒÎÂ£µz
Census and Statistics
fomd¾;fïka;=j
vønUPÍ®
² Developing countries
- ixj¾Okh fjñka mj;sk
- A¤Â¸zv Aøh¢x Á¸®
rgj,a
|õkPÒ
Infant mortality
- <ore urK
- ]_ ©µn®
² Maternal mortality
- ud;D urK
- PØ¤ozuõ´ ©µn Ãu®
Life expectancy
- wdhq wfmalaIdj
- ¤µ\Á ©µn®
Population composition
- ck ixhq;sh
- \ÚzöuõøP Tmk
Population structure
- ckixLHd jHqyh
- \ÚzöuõøPU Pmhø©¨¦
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Census reports
- ix.Kk jd¾;d
- öuõøP ©v¨¦ AÔUøP
² Annual growth rate
- jd¾Isl j¾Ok wkqmd;slh
- Á¸hõ¢u ÁÍºa] Ãu®
² Growth rate
- j¾Ok YS>%;dj
- ÁÍºa] Ãu®
² Birth rate
- Wm;a wkqmd;slh
- ¤Ó¨¦ ÂQu®
² Death rate
- urK wkqmd;slh
- CÓ¨¦ ÂQu®
² Natural growth
- iajdNdúl j¾Okh
- C¯ØøP AvP›¨¦
Labour force
- Y%u n,ldh
- FÈ¯¨ £øh
² Dependents
- hefmkakka
- u[Q°¸¨÷£õº
For free distribution
For free distribution
Development
Development is a dynamic concept. It is continuous and unending.
The main objective of this chapter is to study the basic concepts of
development and also the development procedures in Sri Lanka.
The concept of development has changed over time. Until the middle of the 20th century,
the economic development in a country was termed as ‘development’. (Fig. 5.1)
Later, “development” became
a broader concept which
encompasses several fields.
By the end of the 20th century,
development was not only
an economic and physical
assessment but also included
components
human development.
essential
Fig. 5.1 - Indicators used to measure development
Fig. 5.1 - Indicators used to measure development
during the early period.
Fig. 5.2 - present Indicators to measure development.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
The meaning of the term “development” becomes clearer when some
definitions of development are studied.
“Social development should take place along with economic development.
social development should take place within sectors encompassing food and
nutrition, health, education, housing social security, clothing, leisure and human
freedom” (1978, UNESCO Declaration ).
“Development is a chain of processes which includes factors related to
population, social, cultural and ethical issues”(3rd development decade 1980 – 90
UNO).
In the process of development focus was on protecting and conserving
the environment, and also on the quality of the environment in the 80’s and in
the 90’s more focus was on sustainable development. With regard to sustainable
development, the inter-relationship among the economic, social and environmental
fields was also incorporated into the concept of development. As the concept of
development has evolved over time, different indicators to measure development
have also been used.
Activities
1. Prepare a simple definition to make the concept of ‘development’ more
meaningful.
2. Obtain instructions from teachers and collect other definitions to identify
the concept of ‘development’.
3. Indictors to measure Development
Although development has been identified as a concept, different countries
adopted different indicators to measure it. Once the wide meaning of development
was understood, various institutions,organizations and individuals introduced
more qualitative indicators to assess it.
Indicators to measure Development
Old indicator
² Gross National Product
² Per capita income
² Gross Nation Development
Modern indicator
² Physical Quality of Life Index(P Q L I)
² Human Development Index (H D I)
² Human Poverty Index (H P I)
² Human Suffering Index (H S I)
It was not possible to express the real status of ‘development’ by the
indicators used during the early period. They were adequate only to show the
middle and low levels of development. Later the concept developed further,
and the Human Development Index (HDI) which was introduced by the United
For free distribution
For free distribution
Nations Development Programme (1990/1999), was used to measure ‘development’.
Through that indicator, it was possible to avoid the weakness and identify the ‘real
status of development’. This indicator which includes three basic features of human
development is a compact indicator. The main indicators used in measuring Human
Development Indicator are, life expectancy at birth, literacy and purchasing power
parity tallied with the per capita gross national product.
According to the index which extends 0-1 countries of the world can be
identified under four groups.
1. Countries where human development is very high
2. Countries where human development is high
3. Countries where human development is moderate
4. Countries where human development is low
Sri Lanka, in the year 2012 has obtained
development index with a value of 0.715
and had acquired the 92nd place out of
187 countries of the world.(Central Bank
Report of Sri Lanka 2012)
Among the SAARC countries, Sri
Lanka has the highest level of human
development and is also the only
SAARC country which is in the high
development group (Annual Report
2013. Finance and Plan implementation
Ministry)
Activity
1. Write two indicators used to measure development in the,
(a) Early period.
(b) Modern period.
2. “Development does not mean only the economic development of a country”
Explain this statement with examples.
3. “The best indicator to measure the development of a country is the Human
Development Index” Give reasons to justify this statement.
4. Describe briefly how the development of a country can be done without
being an obstacle to environment equilibrium.
Sustainable Development
In the past most countries of the world considered progress in the economic
field as development. This idea being prevalent even during the 21st century has given
rise to several unfavourable consequences.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Consequences of Development
Resources in the development process
Imbalance in Natural
resources
Excessive consumption of
natural resources
Scarcity of resources
Exhaustion of resources
Search for alternative
resources
Competition to own resources
Effects on
environment
Environmental pollution
Increase in global
warming
Damages to the
Ozone layer
Climate changes
Natural disasters
Harming bio resources
The necessity for sustainable
development program
Fig. 5.3 - Development Reactions
Due to the fast growth of population, increase in needs and needs
becoming more complexed new production process has been widened. As
industrialization took place without proper control, an environmental imbalance
emerged. Hence attention was paid on sustainable development to prevent the
imbalance of the environment. The objective of sustainable development is to
incorporate the management of the development process with the environmental
management. It focuses on future while upgrading the man’s existence and life
style.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activityivity
Activity
Explain with examples that it is essential to have a sustainable development
process for the survival of a country.
Assignment
1. With the aid of the information of mass media, Prepare a list of
problems which have emerged when countries of the world undergo the
development process.
2. Present suggestions to solve those problems.
Recent development activities in Sri Lanka
A self - sufficient economy was prevalent in Sri Lanka during the hydraulic
civilization. However, when Sri Lanka became a colony of western nations, it turned
out to be an import - export economy. After Sri Lanka gained independence, farming
settlements, river – valley developments, multi- purpose development schemes,
Large scale industries free trade zones, export villages, industrial settlements and
activities of similar nature took place along diverse fields.
The main focus of the present development process is on the improvement
of infrastructure facilities. Improvement of infrastructure facilities which is
considered as a necessity for the development of a country, would also help in the
human resource development.
² New areas of the country will be open to development
² Widening of the trade market
² New products reach the market quickly
² Movement of passengers and goods is accelerated
² Time is saved and physical distance become less
² Internal migration patterns change
² New employment opportunities arise
² A change occurs in the supply route grid of existing goods
and services (Automobile, Aviation, Harbour)
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fig. 5.4 - Recent development projects in Sri Lanka
Railway and highway development
² Construction of many new roads
(Colombo – Matara, Colombo -Katunayaka
Colombo outer circular Road)
² Proposed Express ways ((Colombo – Jaffna,
Colombo – Kandy, Matara- Hambantota)
² Road construction project in the North; under
this project construction has been completed
on the Kandy Jaffna road, Paranthan
Pooneryn, Mankulam –Wellamkulam,
BatticaloaTrincomalee and many other roads.
Fig: 5.5 - Highway bypass
² As buses with modern facilities run on these roads, time spent on travelling
and physical distance have been minimized.
² Widening and carpeting of existing roads.
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Minimizing traffic congestion by constructing flyovers.(Nugegoda, Ragama,
Veyangoda).
constructing underground tunnels (Ramboda) and pedestrian crossings(Kandy,
Borella).
² Removal of unauthorized constructions on pavements and construction of
pavements(Colombo Fort ,Pettah and Kandy).
Improving the Southern railway.
² Widening the Kelani valley road.
² Reconstructing the Northern Railway.
² Commencing work on the proposed- Matara – Kataragama railway up to
Dikwella.
² Reconstructing Colombo – Jaffna Railway.
Activities
1. Mark the existing and proposed expressways on an outline map of Sri
Lanka.
2. What are the advantages of developing roads and railways in a country?
Development of Ports and Airports
² Developing the Bandaranayake International Airport in Katunayake with
modern facilities.
² Constructing a new international airport at Mattala.
² Developing domestic airports like Rathmalana, Palaly and Anuradhapura.
facilities
infrastructure
Improving
such as railways, availability of motor
vehicles around airports.
² Making Katunayaka
and Mattala
airports as centers providing service
for the international air services during
emergencies.
Improving Colombo Sothern port,
Oluvil port and widening their service
conditions.
Fig. 5.6 - Colombo Harbour
(with the new jetty)
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² The construction of Magampura Port in Hambantota with modern facilities.
Arrangement for re-export, providing of fuel and water for ships storage for
fuel, vehical yards and container terminals are also planned to be built in the
surroundings.
It is planned to build the Port city,
with Housing complexes, Shopping
Complexes, Hotel complexes, Service
centers, and places with facilities for
recreational activities.
Identifying the location of Sri Lanka at
the centre of the maritime silk route and
making it the center of re-export in the
container transport.
Fig. 5.7 - A container ship
Improve Dry Docks.
Improve facilities in old ports located in the North, East and Galle. If the
above plans are implemented, Sri Lanka would be a destination for large
ships and for tourist cruise ships with very modern facilities.
Development of Human Resources
In developing a country, man is considered the most important resource. He
has been able to innovate and produce goods using all the resources of the physical
environment by using his intelligence and skills. In other words, man creates the
cultural environment based on the physical environment. Hence it becomes essential
to launch programme to improve man’s physical and mental skills as well as his
spiritual values when developing human resources.
Since ancient times, Sri Lanka has been a country favorable to man. From the
time Sri Lanka obtained independence, education, health services and security was
provided free. Certain services are provided with concessions to a selected crowd.
Sri Lanka is also considered a welfare state because all governments that came into
power provided common amenities free of charge.
Housing projects, community health programmes, Devineguma, Samudhi and
Jana Saviya programmes were launched from time to time for human development.
Maga Neguma project to develop roads at rural level and self employment projects
were started to bring about development in the community. Under these projects
opportunities to bring about leisure and entertainment were also provided.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Similar to improvements in various
fields in the country there are innumerable
projects which are also implemented at rural,
urban and provincial levels.
It is essential to develop education of
the citizens in order to improve their ability to
develop the country. With the aim of realizing
Fig. 5.8 - Diyawanna park
this objective, special attention paid to provide education for all, improve
quality of education and organize educational opportunities to suit the
changing labour market. Many steps have been taken with these purposes
in view.
² Giving scholarships to students
² Providing modern laboratory facilities
² Navodaya schools
² Technical schools
² Poly- Technical Colleges.
² Setting up vocational training institutes for school dropouts
² Increasing the number of universities and increasing the student
intake
² Introducing technological subjects to G.C.E. (Advanced Level)
² Thousand schools programme
² Widening of higher education
² Science colleges
² Computer training institutions
Fig. 5.9 - Steps taken to develop Education in Sri Lanka
In the Development Process of a country, it is essential to produce a healthy
community. For this purpose health facilities of a country has to be developed. The
services rendered by the Health Sector as a welfare service in Sri Lanka has to be
appreciated.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
services
focused
These
programmes
human development
in Sri
Lanka within the past decade.
People with healthy bodies and
healthy minds can successfully
achieve benefits of education
and it is easy to motivate them
towards
development
process. Similarly, they can
change, bear the burden of
change and also succeed in
enjoying its benefits. It is
expected to build a social
environment through such a
group of citizens by developing
health and education sectors.
Activities
1. Write down five procedures that have been implemented to develop human
resources in Sri Lanka.
2. Explain how such procedures contribute towards the development of the country
with examples.
Regional Development
To facilitate provincial development administrative divisions are set up in
Sri Lanka, as villages, Gramaseveka Divisions, Divisional secretariat Divisions,
Districts and Provinces. Similarly, from the National Level to the Provincial level
there is a chain of activities in the development process.
For free distribution
For free distribution
The main objective of Regional Development is to act towards human welfare,
minimizing discriminations, by utilizing the resources and the physical
environment centered in different areas.
Since gaining independence, for many decades, various development
projects have been implemented in order to minimize the gap between the village
and town. (table 5.1)
Table 5.1 - Various development projects in Sri Lanka.
Village
• Empowering the low income groups in
the rural sector by means of Janasaviya,
Divineguma and Samurdhi projects.
• Taking steps to remove rural
unemployment by the 200 garment
Factory project.
• Reconstruction of rural roads by
using asphalt carpeting and
also paving them with concrete
and stone.
• Improvements in common
amenities under “One task for one
village”programme.
• Empowering the economic
Strength of rural unemployed under
the Divineguma project.
• Improving rural industries and
setting up rural hydro-power
projects to uplift the lives of
people in remote, isolated villages.
• Implementing community based
water projects for cultivation of crops
and to fulfill water requirements.
• Implementing Gami Diriya project
Centered on places of worship,
Sports associations and funeral welfare
societies.
• Appointing service personnel who
would work with rural family units
and set up programmes to empower
such families.
• Broadening roads in urban areas by the
road Development Authority.
• Removal of unauthorized constructions
and clearing pavements for the
pedestrians.
• Landscaping and developing cities
(Colombo,
Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, Gall and
Kandy).
• Widening opportunities for leisure
and entertainment in urban surrounding.
• Removal of slums, accelerating high
rise building projects, new housing
complexes and reconstructing urban
housing complexes by National
housing Development authority.
• Building new shopping complexes.
• Removal of swamps in urban areas and
constructing Sports grounds, swimming
pools, and leisure parks on such lands.
• Improving facilities close to public
utility centers.
• Constructing urban car parks.
• Changes made in Provincial
Administration structure;
Provincial Councils
Pradeshiya Sabha
Municipal councils
Urban councils.
• Implement solid waste management
programmes.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
1. Name three benefits that can be achieved by improving facilities in rural areas.
2. “Development in village / town helps development in the country” Explain
this statement with examples.
Knowledge based Development and Information and Communication
Technology
Information and communication technology is a service which is used to
collect, store, analyze and exchange data in various sectors. Through this the
country and the human society has gained many facilities.
Improvement in relationships within and outside the country.
² Opening up more avenues in education.
² Opening up direct and indirect employment opportunities and assisting both
the prospective service providers and the services receivers.
² widens the knowledge of ordinary people and also broadens opportunities
to fulfill employment needs.
² Could contribute quickly in times of disaster (like during cyclones, floods,
land slides and tsunamis).
² With electronic financial system transactions become quick and safe.
It is important that a person must be aware of how he could obtain
the service facilities of Information and communication technology and
also about the equipment and tools to be selected for such activities. It is
essential for a person to have a basic education and to know many steps as to
how technological tools can be manipulated, collect data, store and analyze
them and to communicate. In Sri Lanka new avenues have been opened up for
diverse professions and for those engaged in education through Information and
Communication Technology.
For free distribution
For free distribution
I.C.T units and internet
facilities for school systems
Higher education
opportunities provided by
Universities and Higher
education institutions
G.C.E (Advanced Level)
techonology stream
implemented since 2013
Agency Institutions for Sri
Lanka I.C.T
Sources to
acquire
I C T
Knowledge
Competitive Private
Higher Education
Institutions
NenaSala centers and E
Sri Lanka programs to
supply service facilities.
Facilities provided by
the Telecommunication
Regulatory Commission
Activities
1. Prepare a paper including recent trends in the development activities in Sri
Lanka.
2. Describe how upgrading infrastructure in a country affects development .
3. Prepare a list to show the benefits that a country can gain by improving
I.C. T.
4. Write down three advantages and three disadvantages of the internet.
Assignments
Prepare a field work book including information about a programme implemented
to improve facilities in the urban or rural areas in the region where you live.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Bibliography and Sources
Ministry of Finace and Planning /Annual Report 2013
Glossary
Static concept
- .;sl ixl,amh
- {ø»¯õÚ GsnU P¸
² Real national product
- uQ¾; o< cd;sl ksIamdÈ;h
- ö©õzuz ÷u]¯ EØ£zv
² Gross national per-capita product - m%;sYS¾I o< cd;sl ksIamdÈ;h
- ö©õzuz ÷u]¯ uÛ|£º
EØ£zv
² Growth rate of G.N.P.
- o< cd;sl ksIamdÈ;fha j¾Ok fõ.h - G.N.P. Cß ÁÍºa] Ãu®
Physical Quality of Life Index - fN!;sl Ôjk ;;a;aj o¾Ylh
- ö£ÍvP ÁõÌUøP¨
£s¦a _möhs
² Human Development Index - udkqI ixj¾Ok o¾Ylh
- ©Ûu A¤Â¸zva
_möhs
² Human Poverty Index
- udkqI oßø;d o¾Ylh
- ©Ûu ÁÖø©a _möhs
² Human suffering Index
- udkqI mSvl o¾Ylh
- ©õÛh FPa _möhs
² Composite Index
- ix.Dys; o¾Ylh
- Tmka _möhs
Life expectancy
- wdhq wfmalaIdj
- B²Ò Gvº£õº¨¦
Literacy
- idlaIr;dj
- GÊzuÔÄ
Purchasing power parity
- l%h Yla;sh
- öPõÒÍÍÄ \Uv
Sustainable development
- ;srir ixj¾Okh
- {ø»zv¸US® A¤Â¸zv
Industrialization
- ld¾ólrKh
- øPzöuõÈÀ ©¯©õuÀ
Environmental disequilibrium - mdßißl úix;=,kh
- `ÇÀ \©{ø»°ßø©
Environmental equilibrium
- mdßißl iu;=,s;;dj
- `ÇÀ \©{ø»
² Hydraulic civilization
- c,dY%
s; YsIagdpdrh
- }ºÁÍ |õP›P®
Self-sufficient economy
- iajhxfmdaIs; wd¾Ólh
- ußÛøÓÄ¨
ö£õ¸Íõuõµ®
² Agricultural Colonies
- f.dú ckmo
- ÂÁ\õ¯U Põ»ÛPÒ
For free distribution
For free distribution
Export villages
- wmkhk .ïudk
- HØÖ©vU Qµõ©[PÒ
² River Valley
- .x.d ksïk ixj¾Ok jHdmD;sh
- BØÖ¨ £ÒÍzuõUS
Development Project
A¤Â¸zva ö\¯ØÔmh®
² Multi- Purpose
- nyqld¾h ixj¾Ok
- £À÷|õUS A¤Â¸zva
Development Projects fhdackd l%u
ö\¯ØÔmh®
Free – trade zones
- ksoyia fjf<| l,dm
- _u¢vµ ÁºzuP Á»¯®
Industrial colony
- ld¾ñl ckmo
- øPzöuõÈÀ Põ»Û
² Movement of goods
- NdKav ixp,kh
- £sh[PÎß Aø\Ä
Internal migrations
- wNHka;r ixl%uK
- EÒ|õmk Ch¨ ö£¯ºÄ
² Underground tunnels
- N+.; Wux ud¾.
- _¸[P¨ £õøuPÒ
Pedestrian crossings
- mÈl udre
- £õu\õ›PÒ PhøÁ
² Unauthorized constructions
- wkjir bÈlsÍï
- \mhÂ÷µõuU Pmhø©¨¦PÒ
² Re-exports
- m%;swmkhk
- «Ò HØÖ©v
² Vehicle parks
- jdyk wx.k
- ÁõPÚ {Özxªh®
² Container transport
- nyd¨ï m%jdyk
- öPõÒP»ß ÷£õUSÁµzx
² Re-export centre
- m%;swmkhk uOHia:dkh
- PÍg]¯ {ø»¯®
² Curative programmes
- frda. ksjdrK jevigyka
- ÷|õ´ £›Põµ {PÌa]z vmh®
² Road Development Authority
- ud¾. ixj¾Ok wêldßh
- Ãv A¤Â¸zv AvPõµ \ø£
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Natural hazards in the world
The natural environment in the world is subjected to large or small scale
natural changes periodically. These changes occur without much notice at times.
Certain changes are quite fascinating. Sometimes they occur unexpectedly and
could be quite destructive. In whichever way they occur, the natural environment
has been subjected to changes since the beginning of the earth. These changes
may continue to occur in future too. Some of these changes occur without human
influence and there are some instances where these changes are intensified as result
of human activities. In whatever the way they occur, the possibility to cause damage
to environment is identified as a natural hazard.
The objective of this chapter is to discuss the areas where natural hazards
occur in the world and the problems they cause.
Natural Hazard
A natural hazard is an event in the
environment that occurs naturally that could cause
harm to humans, economic assets or environment.
Natural Disaster
If the community and their physical
resources and the human activities are damaged
by effects of a certain hazard, such incidents are
called natural disasters. In other words, a natural
disaster occurs when natural hazards are activated.
War, terrorism collapsing of buildings, road traffic
accidents that affect the community are known as
disasters but they are not considered as natural
disasters.
Fig. 6.1 - H azard
Fig. 6.2 - Natural disaster
For free distribution
Fig. 6.3 - A few natural disasters
The hazards can be categorized on the basis of their origin on earth.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
In addition to this categorization, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis,
cyclones and lightning can be identified as natural hazards that occur without any
human influence while landslides, droughts, floods, bushfires and avalanches can
be identified as natural hazards that are intensified by the human activities.
Activities
1. Identify what a hazard is.
2. Explain the difference between a natural hazard and a disaster with examples.
3. Classify the following natural disasters that occur due to natural processes
and that are intensified due to human activities.
(floods, tsunamis, cyclones, bushfires, avalanches, earthquakes, droughts
and landslides).
Earthquakes
Tremors occur on the surface
of the Earth as a result of the
shock waves generated by
the movement of rock masses
within the crust of the Earth
particularly near boundaries
of tectonic plates. When they
occur suddenly and bring about a
vast destruction, they are called
earthquakes.
Causes for Earthquakes
Fig. 6.4 – An incident of an earthquake
The sudden release of the stored energy in the Earth's crust, when it exceeds the
capacity, it causes Earthquakes. The earth’s crust is made up of many tectonic plates
which are connected to each other. There are seven main plates and a number of minor
plates (Map 6.1). These tectonic plates drift towards different directions and earthquakes
are caused as they collide with each other causing powerful movements at the margins.
Earthquakes also occur due to faults that are created on the earth’s surface or during
volcanic activity.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Magnitude of earthquakes
A seismometer is used to measure the intensity or the magnitude of the
earthquakes. The seismic information received through that is recorded in the
seismograph. The values indicated can be included in a scale. This method was
introduced by Charles F Richter in 1935. Hence, it is called the Richter scale.
Table 6.1 indicates the magnitude of earthquakes and the results according
to the values on the Richter scale.
Table 6.1 - Magnitude of earthquakes and their impacts
Value of the Richter scale
2.0 - 3.5
Result
People do not feel it but it is recorded on the scale.
3.5 - 5.5
5.5 - 7.3
7.4 - 8.0
8.0 <
Everybody feels it.
Buildings may collapse.
Serious destruction can be seen.
Completely destructive.
Major earthquake zones of the world
When observing map 6.2 the plate boundary zones can be identified as the
areas where earthquakes occur constantly. The map 6.2 shows four major zones
where earthquakes take place in the world.
A - The area that spreads around
the Pacific Ocean. (Pacific Ring
of Fire)
B - Mediterranean-Himalaya
mountain zone.
C - Mid- Atlantic oceanic ridge.
D - The African Rift Valley Zone.
Map 6.2 - Earthquake zones
For free distribution
Impact of earthquakes
² Cracks and faults appear on the crust.
Landslides and sinking of lands take place in mountainous regions.
² When earthquakes occur in the ocean bed they cause Tsunamis and
destroy the coastal areas the nearby countries.
² Damage to human life and property, destruction of the natural drainage
system and infra-structure facilities.
Activities
1. What is known as an earthquake?
2. Name the major earthquake zones located in the world and shade these areas
on a world map.
Tsunami
The high and lengthy strong ocean waves caused as a result of the different
tremors origin at the ocean bed, that approach the coastal areas are called
Tsunamis.
Phenomena that create Tsunami waves
² Massive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions that occur in the ocean bed.
² Landslides that occur in the ocean bed.
² Fall of meteorites into the sea.
² Falling of large ice sheets from the glaciers into the sea.
Powerful explosions made by man on the surface of the oceans.
Among them, the major factor that causes Tsunami waves is the earthquakes
that occur in the ocean beds. As a result of sudden and powerful tremors occurring
on plate margins, the ocean water is disturbed and creates large tidal waves on
the surface of the ocean. When these waves approach land areas their height is
increased gradually and they convert into Tsunami wave near the coast. These
Tsunami waves cause severe destruction to the coastal areas. Fig. 6.5 shows how
Tsunami waves are formed.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Areas affected by Tsunamis.
Fig. 6.5 - How a Tsunami wave is formed
Tsunami is often seen in the areas where earthquakes are caused.
² The coastal areas around the Pacific Ocean.
² East Indian coast line and the Indian Ocean.
² Coastal areas close to the Caribbean islands.
The impact of the Tsunami disaster
² Damage to human life.
² Destruction of the physical and human landscape of coastal areas.
² Obstruction to fisheries activities.
² Spread of epidemics.
² Displacement of the community and the psychological effect on the
survivors.
Figures 6.6 and 6.7 show how the Banda Aache area in Sumatra islands has
been destroyed due to tsunami in 2004.
Fig. 6.6 - Banda Aache area in
Sumatra Before tsunami
Fig. 6.7 - Banda Aache in Sumatra
After tsunami
For free distribution
Activities
1. What is a Tsunami?
Write down three major causes of Tsunami.
3. Name the areas that face Tsunami disasters in the world and mark them on a
world map.
4. Explain the damage caused by a Tsunami citing examples.
Volcanoes
When the magma in the Earth's interior escapes through the cracks and the
weak areas in the tectonic plate margins, it is called a volcanic eruption. After the
eruption, the magma that flows on the surface of the earth is called lava.
At the beginning, smoke, ashes, different gases and pieces of lava are
ejected to the atmosphere and at the same time lava flows through the crater (vent)
of the volcano. The lava that erupted from the crater of the volcano flows around
the volcano and deposits as cool solid layers. After that, the volcano becomes
dormant. Although it is a dormant volcano it may become re-active causing a
hazardous situation.
When a volcano erupts a huge damage could be caused to human life,
property, as well as to infra- structure facilities.
The effect of
the various
substances emitted into the atmosphere
during a volcanic eruption cannot be
ignored.. In addition to that it could
result short term changes in weather
conditions and could obstruct air travel
too as the ash plumes spread in the
atmosphere.
Distribution of volcanoes
Fig. 6.6 - A volcano Eruption
Volcanoes are mostly found on tectonic plate boundaries. they are also
found on plate subduction areas and in zones located out of plate boundary
areas. 70% of active volcanoes are located in the Pacific plate margins around
the Pacific Ocean. This is famous as the Pacific Ring of Fire.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Impact caused by volcanoes
Map 6.3 - Distribution of volcanoes
The information in the following table depict that the volcanoes cause
various types of destruction.
Volcano
Year erupted
Destruction caused
1. Vesuvius (Italy)
79 AD
2. Vesuvius (Italy)
1631 AD
3. Krakatoa (Indonesia)
1883 AD
The whole city of Pompeii was destroyed
and 16000 human lives were lost.
Eruption prevailed for two days. People
of 15 cities of the surrounding area were
affected by the disaster.
Presence of a dark sky for a number of
days due to the emission of ashes and
smoke with a large eruption. The tremors
of the eruption surroundings caused a
Tsunami and about 36000 people were
killed.
4. Pelee
(Martini Islands)
5. Pinatubo
1902 AD
Killed 30000 people.
1991 AD
Environmental pollution due
emission of ashes. Occurrence of heavy
rain. Killed 5000 people.
For free distribution
6. Eyjafjallajokull
( Iceland)
2010AD
Activities
travel
the European
Brought air
countries to a standstill for six days due to
the spread of ash plumes in a large area of
the atmosphere.
1. i. Find and name the countries where the following volcanoes are occurred.
St.Helena, Parakuteen, Galapagose, Kilimanjaro, Hekla,Visuvius, Fujiyama,
Pinatubo, Mayan, Krakatoa, Ruvapehu.
ii. Mark those volcanoes on an outline map of the world.
2. Explain the damage that is caused to the environment due to eruption of
volcanoes giving examples.
Drought
The main reason for drought is,
unexpected delay in receiving rain for a
number of days.
The British weather scientists define
drought as a continuous time period of 15
days without rain. It is the duration of 30
days in Canada. In Australia the number of
days is greater than this. Accordingly, various
countries in the world define drought in different ways. However, it is apparent
that the main reason for drought is the delay in receiving rain.
Fig. 6.9 - An area affected by drought
People have to face the hazard of drought when the water supply is not
sufficient due to the changes in pattern of rainfall or due to decrease of the amount of
rainfall. This hazard can be minimized to a certain level if water is provided.
The areas mostly affected by droughts in the world
² Central African Sahel zone.
² Midwest zone in North America.
² Central Australia.
² The areas of Hyderabad, Gujarat and Maharashtra in India.
² North western part of China.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Impact of droughts
Infertility of soil.
² Presence of a severe water scarcity.
² Destruction of farm lands.
² Destruction in the bio diversity.
² Damage to vegetation cover
² Obstruction to hydro power generation.
² Humans and animals suffer from starvation and diseases
² Destruction of natural beauty.
Activities
1. Define " drought".
2. Name the major areas which are affected by droughts and mark them in
an outline map of the world.
3. State the damages that are caused by droughts and present your ideas to
minimize the impacts droughts.
Cyclones
The hard blowing wind spinning fast in a swirl originating with an intense centre of
low pressure on the surface of the tropical oceans is called a whirlwind or cyclone.
A whirlwind is the origin of cyclones. The strong winds that gush into the
land from the ocean cause severe damage and eventually die out.
The sea waves become stormy waves
as a result of blowing the cyclone at a high
speed towards the land from the ocean. The
coastal landscape would be affected by this
and incur heavy losses in the surrounding
areas. A disaster condition may prevail due
to heavy rain and strong winds.
Fig. 6.11- A cyclone
For free distribution
Areas affected by cyclones
The land areas located around the
oceans where cyclones may occur can be
identified as areas affected by this hazard.
The tropical areas which have a specific
weather condition such as Indonesia,
Southern coastal areas of the United
States of America and the surrounding
areas of the Bay of Bengal can be cited
as examples. Various names are used for
these whirl winds according to the surrounding areas of each coast.
Map 6.4 - The effect of cyclones
Hurricane - in the North Atlantic Ocean.
Willy-Willy - in the Indian Ocean close to the Southeast coast in Australia.
Typhoon - in the Pacific Ocean beyond the coast of East Asia.
Cyclone - in the Indian Ocean surrounding the Bay of Bengal.
Baguio - in the Pacific Ocean close to the Philippine islands.
Map 6.4 - Indicates the areas where cyclones occur in the world.
Map 6.4 - Areas where cyclones occur.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
1. Name the areas affected by cyclones in the world and mark them on an out-
line map of the world.
2. ‘Cyclones are a destructive hazard’. Explain this with examples.
Impacts of cyclones
² Damage to land areas due to the gush of strong winds with heavy rain.
² Damages to the coastal areas due to the stormy waves and high tides.
² Damages to human life and property.
² Pollution of water sources with the flow of the ocean water due to the
rising waves.
² Causing damages to infra-structure facilities such as communication
systems and electricity lines.
² Obstructions to fisheries activities.
² Spread of epidemics.
Bush Fires
Occurrence of fire and its rapid expansion in forests, scrub lands and grasslands
naturally or through human activities is called wild fire.
possibility
The climatic conditions
such as drought and aridity
increase
the occurrence of bushfires.
Similarly, the vegetation in the
areas where fire occurs is easily
prone to fire. Various types of
grass, dry scrub lands and trees
can be cited as examples.
Fig.6.12 - A bush fire
For free distribution
Reasons for the occurrence bush fires.
Wild fires occur owing to physical effects as well as due to human activities.
Countries where constant bushfire occur in the world
Australia
Canada
China
Indonesia
United States of America
Central African countries
France
Impacts of bush fires
² Damages caused to human life, property and houses.
² Destruction of wild life.
² Causing damages to vegetation cover.
² Pollution of the atmosphere.
Impacts on water sources and soil.
Activities
1. Explain how natural as well as human activities cause bush fires.
2. Name five countries where bush fires occur frequently and mark them on an
outline map of the world.
3. Explain the damage that is caused to the environment due to bush fires.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Assignment
1. Using the information in the media, mark the places on an outline map of the
world where high intensity earthquakes occurred recently and explain briefly
their effects.
2. Prepare an article to the school wall paper about the occurrence of tsunami
waves due to the earthquakes that occur on oceanic plate margins.
3. Name a few strong cyclones that occurred in the world recently and write the
country and the year they happened. For example. Cyclone Katarina which
happened in the state of Mississippi in the USA.
4. Prepare a hand out includes the proposals to the community to minimize the
disaster caused by bushfire.
Bibliography and Sources
• wdpd¾h A. H. Okmd," zzmßir wOHhkhZZ ^2012&" iriú m%ldYlfhda
• wdpd¾h A. H. Okmd," zziajNdúl úm;aZZ ^2008&" iriú m%ldYlfhda
• .=re WmfoaYl w;afmd;" zzwdmod l<ukdlrKhZZ cd;sl wOHdmk wdh;kh"
uyr.u'
• .=re ud¾f.damfoaY ix.%yh" N+f.da, úoHdj" 13 fY%aKsh" ^2007& cd;sl wOHdmk
wdh;kh" uyr.u'
• cd;sl f.dvke.s,s m¾fhaIK ixúOdkh (NBRO) ud¾f.damfoaYlh" ^2009&
• uydpd¾h Wmd,s ùrlafldä" fN!;sl N+f.da, úoHdj II, ^2009&" l¾;D m%ldYkhls'
• Sri Lanka Urban Multi- hazard Disaster Mitigation Project (SLUM - DMP)
Guidelines.
• Cyclones and high winds, flood prone areas, Landslide Prone Areas, Lighting
Striles, Tsunami, (2003)
• www. Chpb.gov.lk
For free distribution
Tsunami
² Volcanoes
Cyclones
Lightning
² Drought
Bush fire
Glossary
² Natural hazard
- iajdNdúl Wmøjh
- C¯ØøP ChºPÒ
² Natural disaster
- iajdNdúl wdmodj
- C¯ØøP¨ ÷£µÚºzu®
Earthquakes
- N+ñlïmd
- ¦Â|kUP[PÒ
- iqkdñ
- .sksl÷
- iq<s iq<x
- _Úõª
- G›©ø»PÒ
- `ÓõÁÎPÒ
- wl=Kq ier
- ªßÚÀ uõUP®
- kshÕ
- <eõ.sks
- Áµm]
- Põmkz w
Earth’s crust
- mDÓú mDIaGh
- ¦Â÷¯õk
Strata of rocks
- mdIdK ia;r
- £õøÓ¨£øh
Tectonic movements
- N+ p,k
- uPmhø\Ä
Retaining capacity
- /|jqï Odß;dj
- Gg]°¸US® C¯»ÍÄ
Tectonic plates
- N+ ;eá
- ¦ÂUPÁ\zuPkPÒ
² Volcanism
- huy,a l%shdj,sh
- G›©ø»¯õUP®
Fault
Seismometer
Seismograph
- úfNao
- SøÓ/ ¤ÍÄ
- N+ lïmk udkh
- ¦Â|kUP Aø»£v P¸Â
- N+ lïmd m%ia;drh
- ¦Â|kUP Aø»£v Áøµ¦
Tectonic plate boundaries - ;eá udhsï l,dm
- ¦Â÷¯õmk uPmk GÀø»PÒ
² Meteorites
- W,aldmd;
- ÂsPØPÒ/ BPõ¯UPØPÒ
² Ocean waves
- id.r ;rx.
- \•zvµ Aø»PÒ
Eruption
- úodrKh ùu
- PUSuÀ
Crater / vent
- huy,a uqLh
- G›©ø» Áõ´
² Origin
Cyclone
- m%Njh
- jdiq<sh
- ÷uõØÓ®
- `ÓõÁÎ
Swirl of winds
- iq<x m%jdy
- PõØ÷Óõmh®
² Aridness
- Y=Ial;dj
- Áµm]z ußø©
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
77 Natural hazards in Sri Lanka
Many factors such as Sri Lanka being an island, the internal landscape ,
location within a tropical climatic zone and the high population affect the the
occurrence of many natural hazards in Sri Lanka.
Landslides, floods, cyclones, lightning, and Tsunami are the major natural hazards
that occur in Sri Lanka.
Studying about the natural hazards that occur in Sri Lanka, along with their
impacts, methods to face them and ways of mitigating their impact, is the
objective of this chapter.
If we could maintain the manmade human landscape, built to meet the
demands of the community, free of hazards, it would help in accelerating the
socio economic development of the country. It is evident that the frequency in
the occurrence of hazard like landslides, floods, droughts are increasing in Sri
Lanka. Building the human landscape without paying any concern to the physical
environment and irregular management of the environment have adversely affected
in intensifying such hazards.
Landslides
The sudden movement of soil, rocks
and vegetation cover on a slope in an
elevated area towards the lower areas
can be called a landslide.
Landslides
common
phenomenon
the mountainous
regions, especially in the hill country
wet zone.
Fig.7.1- Land slide
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map 7.1 indicates seven districts in Sri Lanka which have been identified as
areas prone to landslides by the Disaster Management Center.
Reasons for landslides
Natural reasons as well as human activities have affected the occurrence of
landslides.
Natural reasons
² Occurrence of tremors.
² Heavy, incessant rainfall.
² Steep slopes in mountains.
Structure of the stone layers and
weathering of them.
² Poor drainage pattern.
² Decrease of
the vegetation
cover.
Human activities
Improper use of the lands with slopes.
² Clearing the forests on slopes.
² Obstructing natural water ways.
² Mining in mountainous areas.
² Removal of earth, quarrying and
breaking rocks using explosives.
Improper constructions on mountain
slopes.
Map 7.1 - Areas affected by landslides
Signs of an impending landslide
Particular changes in the immediate environment indicate the occurrence
of a landslide in near future. The damage can be minimized if these features
are identified accurately. Some of such signs are mentioned below.
² Appearance of cracks on houses and other buildings.
² Sinking or appearance of cracks in the land area.
Inclination of trees, lamp posts and telephone posts in the area.
² Dying of large trees on slopes instantly.
² Changes in water sources in the lower areas of slopes.
² Changes in the behavioural patterns of certain animals.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Steps taken to minimize the hazard of landslides.
Protection of the vegetation covers on lands with slopes.
² Not obstructing the natural drainage pattern.
² Following scientific instructions when using lands with slopes.
² Not building reservoirs in elevated areas.
² Not constructing buildings in the lands with steep slopes.
² Taking steps to protect the stability of the land areas with slopes. Examples-
retaining walls, drains and forestation etc.
² Community awareness programme.
Activities
1. Explain what a land slide is.
2. Name and shade the districts identified by the Disaster Management Center in
Sri Lanka as the areas threatened with landslide risks.
3. Explain in brief the damages caused by landslides.
Floods
Floods can be identified as the most
common natural hazard in Sri Lanka. Floods
can be seen in the areas that receive heavy rain
and in the river basins and the areas around
the estuaries of Kelani, Kalu, Gin, Nilwala,
Mahaoya and Mahaweli rivers. Floods occur
suddenly as a result of a rise in the water level
of rivers and overflowing the either sides of the valleys and also as a consequence
of obstructions of water ways. This hazard can be mostly seen in urban areas close
to low lands. The human activity in the areas blocking the places where water drains
naturally during heavy rains, intensifies the risk of floods in such areas.
Fig. 2.7 - A flooded area
For free distribution
For free distribution
The areas subjected to frequent floods.
² Low lands around river basins and estuaries.
² Urban areas located close to rivers.
² Eg: Colombo, Kalutara, Matara and Ratnapura.
² Low lands around tanks and reservoirs.
Reasons that affect the floods.
Natural reasons as well as human activities cause floods.
At present, it is clear that human
activities cause floods than natural
reasons.
² Steps that can be taken to minimize
the flood hazard.
² Not clearing
the forests
catchment areas.
² Keeping the estuaries open.
² Protection of the low lands and wet
lands.
² Limiting the sand mining in rivers.
² Constructing buildings resistant to
floods.
² Limiting human activities at the
places where the tanks and rivers
overflow.
² Community awareness programmes.
Activities
1. Name and mark some river
basins in Sri Lanka, which are
frequently flooded during the
rainy seasons.
2. Name and mark some urban
areas which are
frequently
flooded in the map you have
drawn.
3. Draw a flooded area and colour
4. Write three steps that have to be
taken to minimize floods.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Cyclone
The depressions in the atmosphere
that develop in the areas around the Bay
of Bengal move as cyclones towards India
or Sri Lanka. In Sri Lanka, cyclones occur
mostly in the Northern and Eastern regions
during the period from October to December.
Map 7.2 indicates several districts which are
mostly affected by cyclones. Even though
heavy damages are not reported frequently, the cyclone that hit the country in
November 1978 incurred heavy losses and many lives were lost too.
Fig. 7.3 - A cyclone in bay of Bengale
identify
the general public
Although
could not identify this hazard
beforehand, the meteorologists
Satellite technology. Therefore,
weather forecasts are useful
to mitigate the impacts of this
hazard to a certain level.
through
Steps that can be taken to
minimize the impact of cyclones.
² Paying attention
weather reports.
² Removing
trees grown
close to houses.
² Making the roofs of houses
stable.
² Preparation of strong wind
shields.
² Moving
to a place of
protection when there is a
strong wind.
Fig. 7.4 - District affect by cyclones
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activities
1. Shade the areas in Sri Lanka which are affected by cyclones in an outline
map of Sri Lanka.
2. Mention the damages that are caused due to cyclones and write three steps
that can be taken to minimize them.
Drought
Various countries in the world have different definitions related to ‘drought’.
There are different ideas presented in Sri Lanka too. According to the report of
climatic changes prepared by the Ministry of Forest resources and Environment,
the duration of receiving less than 75% of expected rainfall in Sri Lanka is called
the time duration that causes drought. However, the time periods of droughts in Sri
Lanka vary in different areas.
The dry zone of Sri Lanka experiences a
drought condition once in every three or
four years. It is identified that drought
condition that affects the whole Sri Lanka
occurs in every ten years.
Fig. 7.4 - Cultivated land affected by
drought
Reasons that cause droughts.
² Climatic changes.
Increase in global warming.
² Pollution of the atmosphere.
² Destruction of forests.
² Unexpected scarcity of water.
Fig. Map 7.3 - Areas affected by constant
droughts
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Steps that can be taken to minimize the impact of a drought.
² Storage of rain water.
² Conservation of water sources and protection of the vegetation cover.
² Using water sparingly.
² Preference towards crops with water efficiency.
Activities
1. Mark and shade districts which are affected by droughts in a district map of
Sri Lanka.
2. Name some crops resistant to droughts at least to a certain extent.
3. “Human activities affect the occurrence of droughts more than natural
causes” Explain this with reference to two examples.
Lightning
Lightning is a natural phenomenon
which is identified as a very common
hazard in Sri Lanka. Especially during inter
monsoonal period with the convectional
process, lightning can be seen throughout
the island.
The reason for lightning is the higher
cumulus clouds forming under unstable
Fig. 7.5 - Lightning
and humid atmospheric conditions during inter monsoonal periods. The electric
discharge of positive and negative charges within the cumulus clouds is called
lightning.
Lightning can be divided into three categories. They are,
² Cloud lightning (discharges between clouds and clouds)
² Air lightning (discharges between clouds and space)
² Earth lightning (discharges between clouds and the earth)
For free distribution
For free distribution
More damages are caused by earth lightning that occurs between the clouds
and the earth. Although earth lightning may occur at any place in Sri Lanka, it has
been identified more damage would cause in the areas that receive inter monsoonal
rain in abundance.
Lightning causes more damages like loss of lives and destruction of
property in Sri Lanka. According to the reports of the Disaster Management Center
about 50 lives are lost annually due to lightning .In addition to that; taller buildings
and electrical appliances are damaged mostly at the occasions of this hazard.
Steps that could be taken to prevent from lightning.
² Use earth wires connected to the electric circuits of buildings and houses.
Install lightning conductors on taller buildings.
² Fix a trip switch to the electric supply at home.
² Disconnect electric and electronic appliances when lightning.
² Avoid staying in open spaces or under single trees.
² Avoid touching metals when lightning.
² Be alert and making others also aware about the hazard during a period of
strong lightning.
Activities
1. Mention the time period that lightning occurs mostly in Sri Lanka.
2. Explain the damages caused by lightning.
Tsunami
Sri Lanka had to undergo the tragic experiences of Tsunami catastrophe
on the 26th of December 2004. This hazard can be considered as the most tragic
natural hazard that occurred in the recent history not only to Sri Lanka but in many
countries in the Southeast Asia.
Tsunami waves were triggered after an earthquake that occurred on the plate
boundaries located close to Sumatra islands, in an area known for earthquakes with
a higher intensity. These tsunami waves tragically destructed the Northern, Eastern
and Western coastal areas in Sri Lanka.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
The coastal areas of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Trincomallee, Batticaloa, Ampara,
Hambantota, Matara, Galle and Kalutara districts were severely damaged.The
death toll recorded was about 35000 while 500000 were recorded as displaced.
Property and ecosystems with a immense value were too destroyed.
Steps that can be taken to minimize the damage caused by Tsunami
² Limiting construction work close to the
coast.
² Protection of the natural eco-systems
located close to the coast.
Installing tsunami warning systems
and community awareness.
² Soon after receiving tsunami warnings,
evacuate from the coastal areas and
move to a place with a higher elevation.
If there are no elevated places in the vicinity, move to an upper floor of a
building constructed with reinforced concrete.
Fig. 7.10 –Tsunami waves
² Listening to media.
² Listening to tsunami warning systems.
² Evacuate the coast when the sound of an earth quake is heard without
waiting for the tsunami warning.
Activities
1. Explain what a tsunami is.
2. Shade and name the districts which were affected by tsunami hazard on the
26th of December 2004 in a district map of Sri Lanka.
Disaster Management Programme in Sri Lanka.
The disaster management programme became dynamic with the tsunami that
struck on the 26th of December 2004 in Sri Lanka. A formal institutional structure
was established with new laws, rules and regulations for disaster management in
the year 2005.
For free distribution
For free distribution
The institutional structure related to disaster management.
² Establishment of a ministry related to disaster management.
² Establishment of a National Disaster Management Centre (NDMC) with
political leadership.
² Establishment of a Disaster Management Centre (DMC) under a director
general.
² Establishment of a Disaster Management Centers in divisional secretariat
divisions and district levels.
Implementation of school programmes related to protection from hazards.
Through the above institutional structure, many community services are
performed related to hazardous situations that occur at any place in Sri Lanka.
Prevention from hazards, hazard mitigation, responding and rehabilitation activities
related to them are included in the management programme. Not only the state
sector but community based organizations and non-government organizations also
actively contribute towards disaster management activities in Sri Lanka.
Disaster Management Cycle
Disaster management cycle is the model that indicates the process of hazard
management. It shows a dynamic management activity from the pre-hazard level to
the post – hazard level.
Preparation
² Attempting
features that occur prior to the
hazard.
identify
² Forecasting related to the hazard.
² Preparation to face the hazard.
Fig.7.11 - Hazard management cycle
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Response
Although responses may change according to each hazard the necessity of
responding to any hazard is compulsory.
• Assuring the protection of the community subjected to the hazard.
• Providing medical treatments.
• Protection of physical property as much as possible.
• Providing temporary lodging.
• Providing food.
Recovery
This includes the necessity of rehabilitation of the environment and the
people subjected to the hazard. Planning long term and short term actions is
significant in the recovery process. This encompasses recovery of people who were
both physically and mentally victimized by the hazard.
Mitigation
The steps taken to minimize the hazard are similar to the steps related to
preparation. However, the risk of the hazard can be minimized through other steps.
Installing warning systems.
² Community awareness and participation.
Introduction of some implements that can be used to minimize the hazard.
Strengthening disaster management institutions.
Activities
1. Name natural hazards that occur in Sri Lanka frequently.
2. Select any two hazards and prepare a list of steps that can be taken at each
stage of the Disaster Management Cycle.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Assignments
1. Identify the natural hazards that occur in your living area.
2. Collect information related to the natural hazards that occurred in your
area and their effects and prepare an article to the school wall paper.
3. Explain in brief what you have heard about the behavioural patterns of
certain animals before a natural hazard.
4. Find information through media and prepare a list including the damages
caused due to lightning in Sri Lanka.
5. Prepare a poster to make people aware including the steps that could be
taken to minimize the hazard of lightning.
6. Prepare a report related to the damage caused by tsunami in Sri Lanka
obtaining information from newspapers and your elders to be presented to
the classroom.
7. Prepare a list of proposals to uplift the physical and mental conditions of
the people affected by hazards.
Bibliography and Sources
² uydpd¾h Wmd,s ùrlafldä" fN!;sl N+f.da, úoHdj »»" ^2009& l;D m%ldYkhls'
² wdpd¾h A.H. Okmd, zzmßir wOHkhZZ ^2012& iriú m%ldYlfhda'
² wdpd¾h A.H. Okmd, zziajNdúl úm;aZZ ^2008& iriú m%ldYlfhda'
² cd;sl f.dvke.s,s m¾fhaYk ixúOdkh ^NBRO&" ud¾f.damfoaYlh ^2009&
² Sri Lanka urban multi-hazard Disaster Mitigation Project (SLUMDMP)
Guidelines
² Cyclones and high winds, Flood Prone Areas, Landslide Prone Areas,
Lightning Strikes, Tsunami - 2003
² www.chpb.gov.lk
² .=re WmfoaYl w;afmd;" zzwdmod l<ukdlrKhZZ cd;sl wOHdmk wdh;kh"
uyr.u'
² .=re ud¾f.damfoaY ix.%yh" N+f.da, úoHdj" 13 fY%aKsh" ^2007& cd;sl wOHdmk
wdh;kh" uyr.u'
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Glossary
² Cleavages
² Run off
- me¿ï ;,
- wmOdjh
- ¤ÍÄz uÍ[PÒ
- PÊÄ }÷µõmh®
² Cloud lightning
- j,d wl=Kq
- •QÀ ªßÚÀ
² Air lightning
- jdhq wl=K
Earth lightning
- mDÓú wl=Kq
- ÁÎ ªßÚÀ
- ¦ÂªßÚÀ
Lightning conductor
- wl=Kq ikakdhl
- ªßÚÀ uõ[Q
² Disaster management cycle - wdmod l<ukdlrK pl%h
- AÚºzu •Põø©zxÁ Ámh®
Preparation
- fmr iqodku
- •ßÚõ¯zu®
² Response
² Recovery
- m%;spdr oelaùu
- Gvº öPõÒÍÀ
- h:d ;;a;ajhg m;aùu
- £øÇ¯ {ø»USz v¸®£À
² Mitigation
- wju lsÍu
- uo¨¦
For free distribution
For free distribution
Climatic Changes
Flora and fauna in a particular region is adapted to the climatic conditions
prevalent in that region. The human activities too are adapted to the climatic and the
other physical conditions in that region. The modern man is advanced in science and
technology even to carry out certain human activities under controlled environmental
factors. Some human activities are not eco-friendly and have harmful effects on the
environment. Some examples are,
² Mining of mineral oil resources in the North Sea.
² Air conditioning.
² Commercial dairy farming.
² Burning of fossil fuels.
² Deforestation
² Nuclear experiments.
² Disposal of solid waste.
The above activities have caused changes in many cyclic processes in the
physical environment. Thus we have to face many unfavourable consequences such
as Global warming. Climatic changes are quite significant among them.
Certain environmental processes take place gradually and in a cyclic manner.
When they occur suddenly, it brings about changes in the atmospheric composition
and results global warming. This condition eventually creates extreme conditions in
the climate.
As a result, changes have occurred in patterns of winds, droughts, cyclones,
duration of receiving rainfall and the intensity of rainfall and environmental
temperature. These changes can be called climatic changes. Accordingly, the long
term or short term changes occurring in the general climatic pattern on earth are
identified as climatic changes.
The objective of this chapter is to study the climatic changes, phenomena that cause
climatic changes, impact of the climatic changes on physical and human environment
and about the global agreements and conventions related to this issue.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Clouds Cover
Solar Short Waves
Fig.8.1 - Change in environment cycles and their impacts.
The short wave solar radiation from the Sun is reflected back to space as long
wave radiation (terrestrial radiation). Due to the effect of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere the rising terrestrial radiation remain in the earth’s atmosphere and
this is called the natural greenhouse effect. An atmosphere conducive for for the
living beings is created on earth due to this phenomenon. However, due to various
Human activities as well as natural reasons
have affected the increase in global warming.
human activities, an exceeding
amount of greenhouse gases is
emitted to the atmosphere. These
gases absorb more radiation and
in turn warm up the atmosphere.
This causes an
increase
global warming.
(Accelerated
Greenhouse Effect)
For free distribution
For free distribution
Human activities as well as natural reasons have affected the increase in
global warming.
Natural reasons
² Eruption of volcanoes
² Bushfires
² Natural marshy lands
² Changes in the space
² Sun spots
Human activities
² Burning and over using fossil
fuel.
² Deforestation
Industrialization
² Animal husbandry (ruminants)
² Disposal of solid waste
² Setting fire
² Nuclear experiments
Increase in global warming may cause the following unfavourable
situations.
² Occurrence of climatic changes.
² Rise in sea level due to melting ice in polar regions.
² Destruction of lagoons and salinization of water.
Increase of temperature in oceans and destruction of aquatic organisms.
² Occurrence of cyclones due to increase in the temperature on the surface
of oceans.
² Change of climatic boundary zones.
² Extinction of certain animals and emergence of new species.
² Destructions of animal genes and creations of abnormalities.
² Destruction of crops and decrease of yield.
² Changes in animal breeding zones.
² Pollution of drinking water sources.
The impact of climatic changes on human activities.
² Decrease in income of fishermen due to the reduction of fish harvest.
² Decrease of the crop lands due to salinity of soil.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Spread of diseases due to increase in numbers of the insects that transmits
diseases (vectors).
² Decrease in the harvest of agro-crops.
² Obstruction for agricultural activities due to the changes in the patterns of
Increase in natural hazards (cyclones, droughts and heavy rainfall).
rainfall.
² Loss of settlements when lowlands submerge in sea.
² Contamination of drinking water.
Minimizing climatic changes
Citizens in any country do not like to stay away from the lifestyle they
enjoy, personally or commonly, or to be satisfied by fulfilling their needs
at the minimum level. If they do, it is possible to refrain from unfavourable
environment restricted activities or to minimize such human activities.
Following are some of the activities that can be done to minimize
climatic changes.
² Less consumption of energy sources that emit green house gases.
² Motivation to use energy sources such as wind and solar power.
² Using organic manure for crop cultivation instead of chemical fertilizers.
² Management of solid waste materials.
² Expansion of afforestation.
² Using common transportation facilities.
Introduction of mixed crops and multi crops.
Steps that have been taken to minimize climatic changes at a
global level.
Both developed and developing countries are continuously engaged in
development activities. While employing development strategies each and every
country has contributed towards global warming and occurrence of climatic
changes. Contribution to the climatic changes varies according to the capacity
of energy and fossil fuel consumption of each country. The “World Conservation
Strategies” were prepared by the “International Forum of Nature Conservation” as
For free distribution
For free distribution
a result of understanding this situation. Funds are provided by the United Nations
Environment Protection programme and the World Wild Life Fund for that mission.
They have three main objectives;
² To maintain essential ecological processes and life-support systems.
² To preserve genetic diversity.
² To ensure the sustainable utilization of species of flora and fauna and eco
systems
Following are the milestones of this programme.
² Stockholm Summit held in 1972.
² Brundtland Commission Report. (1987)
² Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 (International Conference on
Environment and Development).
It was proposed to prepare a programme on environment and development
for the 21st century at the conference held at Rio de Janeiro in 1992, with the
participation of delegates from 172 countries.
Sri Lanka too agreed to the decisions made at this conference as a member
country. As a result, a number of programmes were proposed to be implemented
simultaneously at national level for the preparation of better surroundings in the
environment.
² Minimizing activities that emit CFC gas and complete elimination after 2000.
² Vehicle emission tests.
² Solid waste management.
² Minimizing the use of fossil fuels.
² Protection of global bio-diversity by protecting animal and plant species.
² Consumption of regenerating energy (solar power ,wind power and hydro
electricity).
² Green forest cultivation, tree planting programmes, roof-top cultivation, using
organic fertilizer.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Inter-governmental Panel on Climatic Change. (IPCC)
Climatic changes is a theme which has drawn attention of many in the
world recently. Therefore, the United Nations Organization established the Inter
governmental Panel on Climatic Change (IPCC) in 1988.The membership for this
organization is granted for those members of World Meteorological Organization
and the United Nations Environment Project (UNEP). At present, 120 countries
have received the membership of this organization. According to the programme
Convention of the United Nations the organization of Inter governmental Panel of
Climatic Changes provides reports about the climatic changes of these areas.
The Nobel Prize was awarded to both IPCC and ALGORE in 2007 for the reports
published on world climatic changes.
Glossary
² Animal and plant community - i;a;aj yd Ydl m%cdj
- Â»[S ©ØÖ® uõÁµ CÚ[PÒ
² Air conditioning
- jdhq iukh lsÍu
- SÎ¹mkuÀ
² Commercial dairy farming - jHdmdßl .jmÜá md,kh - ÁºzuP £õØ £søn
² Fossil fuel burning
- fmdis, bkaOk oykh
- E°º _Ámk G›ö£õ¸Ò uPÚ®
² Nuclear testing
- kHIaál w;ayod ne,Su
- Aq¨ £›÷\õuøÚ
² Intensity of rainfall
- j¾Idfõ ;Sj%;dj
- ©øÇÃÌa]a ö\ÔÄ
² Global agreements
- f.da,Sh tlÕ;d
- §÷PõÍ J¨£¢u[PÒ
² Short waves
- flá ;rx.
- ]ØÓø»PÒ
² Long waves
- È.= ;rx.
- ö|mhø»PÒ
² Green-house effect
- yß;d.dr wdprKh
- £aø\ Ãmk ÂøÍÄ
² Global warming
- f.da,Sh WIAK;ajh
- §÷PõÍ® öÁ¨£©øhuÀ
² Sunspots
- iQ¾h ,m
- `›¯¨ ¦ÒÎPÒ
² Animal breeding zones
- i;a;aj wNsckkSh l,dm - Â»[QÚ[PÎß P»¨¤Ú Á»¯[PÒ
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Bio-assisted systems
- ffcj iydhl moaO;s
- E°º & EuÂz öuõSvPÒ
² Renewable energy
- m%;sckk n,Yla;s
- «Ð¸ÁõUPa \Uv
² Green forestation
- yß; jk j.dj
- £_ø©U PõhõUP®
Tree Planting Programmes - rela frdamK jevigyka
- ©µ |køP {PÌa]z vmh®
² Balcony cultivation
- i|¿;, j.dj
- ©õi Ãmkz ÷uõmha ö\´øP
Intergovernmental Panel on - foaY.=K úm¾hdi ms<sn|
- Põ»{ø» ©õØÓ[PÒ öuõhº£õÚ
Climate Change (IPCC) wka;¾ wdKavq uKav,h Aµ\õ[PÐU Qøh°»õÚ SÊ
² United Nations Programmes - tlai;a cd;Skaf.a jevigyka - IUQ¯ |õkPÎß
Convention m%{ma;sh {PÌa]z vmha \©Áõ¯®
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
99 1: 50 000 Topographical Maps of
Sri Lanka
A map is very important to have a total study of the landscape of a particular
area. You have already studied about maps, basic features of thematic maps and
topographical maps and peripheral information of maps in Grade 10.
The objective of this chapter is to study about the physical and cultural features in
topographic maps, learn to draw a cross section of a physical landscape and learn to
interpret maps in this lesson.
There are many features such as the topographic features , drainage, coastal
features, natural vegetation, administrative boundaries, transport routes, cultivation,
settlements and several other specific features on a mapped area of topographical maps,.
These features can be classified as natural made and manmade features. They are also
known as physical features and cultural features respectively.
When you learn about the peripheral information and information on the map
face of a 1:50,000 topographical map you will be able to read the map and obtain
complete knowledge about the mapped area.
complete knowledge about the mapped area.
Activity
Identify and name the physical and cultural features found in the area surrounding
of your school or home.
The physical features of a 1: 50 000 topographic map
Features which are naturally formed on land are known as physical features.
These physical features can be divided into four main parts.
² Relief features.
² Drainage features.
² Coastal features.
² Natural vegetation.
For free distribution
For free distribution
The Relief Features
Different landforms on the surface of the Earth are represented by contour
lines on 1: 50 000 topographic maps. The places with equal height are marked after
measuring the height of a certain area .Then lines are drawn on a map connecting
the places with equal height. These lines are known as contour lines.
The value of each contour line is marked by height. The contour line interval
is 20 m. The index contour lines such as 100 m, 200 m, and 300 m are drawn as
dark thick lines in brown. Intermediate contour lines between two index contour
lines are marked in light brown at 20 meter intervals. All the contour lines are not
marked with the height. In mountainous areas where there are more contour lines,
the index contour lines like 100, 200, 300 are marked with the value and the values
of intermediate contour lines are determined according to the interval between two
index contour lines.
As the contour line gap becomes wide in areas with extending plains, spot
height is shown to get the idea about the elevation of the region. The height of
the mountain peaks are also shown by trigonometrical stations. There is a note
on contour lines in peripheral information of the topographical maps. Various
lands forms like plains, mountain ranges, plateaus, valleys, spur and slopes can be
identified by studying height, gap and spreading of the contour lines.
Identifying Relief Features
Plain
A plain is a flat area
on the land. Flat land can be
identified on a map either by
the limitation of contour lines
to few or by the wide gap
between two contour lines.
The change of the height that
occurs here and there, in these
regions can be understood by
the spot height.
Fig. 9.1 - The Plain
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Undulating Land
The region of a plain that consists
of slightly higher lands and low lands
is known as undulating land. Such
undulating feature can be found mostly
in the coastal regions of Sri Lanka.
The undulating lands on maps can be
identified by the location of contour
lines that show the scattered high lands
between two contour lines with a wide
interval.
Fig. 9.2 - Undulating Land
High Lands
A land with a higher elevation
located in a particular area is known as a
highland. More contour lines are located
in a high land and they run very close
to each other. Different landforms like
mountain ranges, plateaus and spurs are
found in a high land.
Valley and Spur
A Valley is an elongated low land
mostly located between two high lands
with a river flowing through. Valleys can
be identified in low lands as well as in
high lands. Wide shallow valleys in low
lands and narrow deep valleys in high land regions are seen. Since the contour
lines extend towards the high land in a V shape, a valley can be identified easily.
Fig. 9.3 - Highland. Valley Spur
The part of high land that extends towards the low land with contour
lines is called spur. In a spur the contour lines spread pointing towards the
low land.
Mountain Range/ Ridge
High lands that extend with a narrow elongated shape are known as mountain
ranges. Such mountain ranges are mostly found in the central hills of Sri Lanka. Lands
For free distribution
For free distribution
with low height extending continuously in
flat lands are called ridges.
Fig. 9.4 - Mountain Range.
Mountain Peak
The height of the peaks located
in a mountain range is shown by a
trigonometrically station. There may
be several peaks located at different
heights in a mountain range.
Fig. 9.5 - Mountain Peak.
Isolated Hill and Conical Hill
hilly
Solitary
regions
scattered in flat lands are called isolated
hills. Generally they are around 100 to
200 meters in height. When an isolated
hill is located in the shape of a cone, it is
known as conical hill. In a conical hill
contour lines extend in circles.
Slopes
Fig. 9.6 - Conical Hill
High lands can have different
types of slopes. These slopes can be
identified by the gap among the contour
lines and by how they spread. If contour lines extend at a distance from each
other gentle slope is shown and if the contour lines extend close to each other
a steep slope is shown. Location of contour lines very close to each other is
a special feature of an escarpment. On some occasions .contour lines in an
escapement extend very closely like over lapping. Waterfalls are formed mostly,
associated with escarpments. Sometimes, gentle slopes and steep slopes could
be found even on the same slope. When a gentle slope is located on the higher
part of a slope and a steep slope is located on the lower part of it, it is called
convex slope.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
When a steep slope is on the higher part of the slope and a gentle slope on
the lower part on the slope are seen, it is called a concave slope.
Fig. 9.7 - Features of Slope
Fig. 9.8 - Gap
Fig. 9.8 - Water pass / gap
lower
region
either
located between
ranges
two mountain
two peaks
or between
of a mountain range is
known as a gap. If a river
flows through a gap it is
a water gap / pass. In the
construction of roads in
hilly areas such gaps are
utilized to build the roads
through them.
Activity
For free distribution
For free distribution
Select a part of a topographic map and draw the physical features of that region.
Drawing a Cross Section of a physical Landcape
The plan that is drawn to a scale to show the profile of a certain Physical Landscape
on a line drawn joining two places on a map is called a cross section.
The cross section is useful to identify the Physical Landscape of a certain area
clearly.
Map 9.1 - Topographic Map
Drawing a Cross Section
Step one.
² First draw a line (A-B line) joining two relevant places as shown on the
map 9.1.
² To draw the base line, draw a line equal to the length of the A-B line.
Draw two vertical lines at the ends of this line and mark the vertical
scale on one line. While the scale of the map is the horizontal scale,
suitable scale can be used for the vertical scale. Consider the elevation
of the mapped area when determining it. According to the above map,
elevation of the mapped area is seen just above 0- 600m. It is appropriate
to use 1 cm=100 m( 2mm=20 m) as vertical scale to show this elevation.
Draw the sufficient number of horizontal lines parallel to the base line to
that interval so as to show the relevant elevation.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Step two.
² Take a sheet of paper for the creation of the cross section and line up an edge
of it on the A-B line drawn on the map.
² Mark the places where contour lines meet the base line with dots or dash
alone the edge of the paper and write the values of the contour lines.
Step Three
² Line up the edge of the paper on the base line of the graph you have
drawn. Next, move the edge of the paper to the 100 m line and marked
the places where 100 m height is marked, on the scale line of the graph
by a dot.. Next take the paper to the 200 m scale line and mark the places
as you have done before. So mark all the heights on the relevant scale
lines of the graph.
² When all the places have been marked join the dots by a line. When the
mountain top is drawn draw the line there without touching the above
scale line in to a shape of a peak.. In low valleys, draw the line without
touching the lower line moving downwards from the dotted places in to
a shape of a valley.
² To complete the drawing of the cross section join the line to two vertical
lines considering the elevations of beginning and ending points.
² By shading the part that shows the landform with light brown, the
landscape is clearly shown.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Fig. 9.11 - Cross section
In the drawing of a cross section the following features must be there.
² The heading should be stated.
² Mark “m” (metre) at the top terminal of the vertical axis.
² Mark “0” at the beginning of the vertical axis.
² State the vertical and horizontal scales.
When a cross section is drawn to show a higher region, after contracting the
vertical scale from zero to the beginning of the elevation, relevant elevations
must be marked.
Activity
Draw the cross sections of above described valley, spur, concave slope, convex
slope and conical hill following the instructions given by the teacher.
The Drainage Features
A river originates as a small stream in a hilly region. When several small
water ways get collected a tributary is formed and when several tributaries join
together the main river is formed.
Fig. 9.11 - River system
When the main river,
all its tributaries and streams
connected to the tributaries
are considered together, it is
called a river system. There
are 103 main river systems in
Sri Lanka.
Most rivers begin in the
central hills and flow through
the low plains following the
relief of the land before falling
into the sea at different places
in the island.
Due to the flow of the rivers through longitudinal valleys located between
two mountain ranges or between two high lands and through transverse valleys that
run across mountain ranges, different types of drainage patterns are formed.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Catchment area and Watershed
The region from where a
certain river collects water or
the region that feeds a river is
the catchment area. When several
tributaries flow into the main river
in the catchment area, the main
river is fed. The central hill is the
catchment area for most rivers
of Sri Lanka. The boundary that
divides two river systems is called
water shed. When rivers flow on
either side of one mountain,
the top of that mountain range
becomes the water shed.
Waterfall
Most often, when rivers
flow, even with a less volume of
water, through narrow valleys
in high lands with escarpments
waterfalls are formed. Several
waterfalls formed in such a
manner can be seen in the
central hills. Waterfalls such
as Dunhinda, Bambarakanda,
Diyaluma can be shown as
examples.
Fig. 9.12. - Longitudinal valley and
Transverse valley.
Fig. 9.13. - Catchment area and watershed
For free distribution
For free distribution
Meander
The feature that is known as a
meander is formed when a river begins to
flow in a circular path due to the blocking
of the river course by the deposition of
the river burden as river flows very slowly
through wide valleys in flat areas.
Marshy Land
Marshy lands are formed due to the
logging of water in the low lands associated
with rivers. Blocking of the water ways of
rivers too is a cause for the formation of
marshy lands. Collection of rain water in low lands also causes to form marshy lands.
Marshy lands are represented in topographical maps by a special symbol.
Fig. 9.14 - Marshy land, Meander and
Braided river
Braided River
When features like small islands are formed in the river due to the
deposition of sediments in the middle of the river while the river flows very
slowly through low plains, it is called a braided river.
Distributaries
A river which flows across low land at slow speed divides itself into several
channels, flows is into main river after a short distance, is called cut off channels.
Some rivers divide themselves into several channels at the river mouth and flow
to the sea. These channels are known as distributaries. Eg. River Mahaveli flows
into the sea through several distributaries at Trincomalee.
Drainage Patterns
The drainage pattern of a
certain area is formed by the relief and
the composition of rocks of that region.
The drainage pattern that is formed
due to the flow of rivers into different
directions from the high land where
they get originated is called radial
drainage pattern. The total drainage
pattern of Sri Lanka that consists of
Fig. 9.15. - Radial drainage pattern
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
a central hills in the mid of the island
and low lands around it shows the
features of the radial drainage pattern.
If the tributaries of a river
system join the main river in the
shape of branches of a tree is called
a dendritic drainage pattern. In most
of the river systems of Sri Lanka a
dendritic drainage pattern can be seen.
When the tributaries of a river
system meet the main river at a right
angle forming the shape of a grid, it
is called trellis drainage pattern. This
drainage pattern can be identified in
the south western plain of Sri Lanka.
The location of the longitudinal and
transverse valleys associated with
the parallel ridges located in the
south western region of the island has
contributed for the formation of such
drainage pattern.
Fig. 9.16. - Radial drainage pattern
Tr a nsve
se valley.
The main rivers like Kelani,
Kalu flow from the central hills
through the transverse valleys of the
south western parallel ridges and
the tributaries join the main rivers
flowing through the longitudinal valleys located among the parallel ridges. On the
1: 50 000 topographic maps of South Western region of Sri Lanka such trellis
drainage pattern can be seen.
Fig. 9.17 - The Dendritic Drainage Pattern
Coastal Features
The relief features can be seen in the coastal areas on 1:50 000 topographic
maps too belong to the physical features.
Lagoon, bay, head/point, sandbar, river mouth islands are the distinct
topographical features of the coastal region. These coastal features are formed due
to the erosion and deposition that occur along the coast line. Rivers flowing from
the inland, structure of the rocks of the coast line and tides are some factors that have
led to the formation of coastal features.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Islands
land surrounded by
water on all sides is known
island. In Sri Lanka
the North, West and
Southwestern there are many
such islands located close to
the coast line of Sri Lanka.
Delfts, Kayts, Nainativu are
few islands located in the
coastal region of North.
Lagoon
The topographical feature
that is formed when the sea
indents towards the land and
is separated by a sand belt but
with a small opening towards
the sea is termed a lagoon.
Eg: Negombo, Batticaloa and
puttalam
Point/ Head
land on
The narrow
coastal belt jutting out to
the sea is known as “point”
Dondra Head, Point Pedro
and Sangamankanda Point
are examples.
The indented area of the
sea towards the land with a
bigger opening to the sea is
a bay. Arugam Bay, Kottiyar
Bay, and Weligam Bay can
be shown as examples. Bays
are used as fishing habours
where small fishing boats
are anchored.
River Mouth
The place where a river flows
to the sea is a river mouth.
There are sand banks formed
near the mouth of the river and
also marshy lands close to the
lands of the river mouth.
Sand bank
The sand brought by
the waves and the rivers
being deposited along the
coastal belt leads to the
formation of sand banks.
Map 9.2 - Coastal features
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Natural Vegetation - The scrubs, forests, grasslands and mangroves that grow
naturally on the land belong to by the natural vegetation. They are shown on
topographic maps symbols. Relief, soil and climate influence the distribution of
the natural vegetation.
Fig. 9.18 - Forest and scrubs
Fig. 9.19 - Grass land
A topographic map represents the total landscape of a region. While the physical
landscape can be understood by the identification of physical features, human
landscape can be understood by the identification of cultural features.
Identifying Cultural Features of a topographic map
The way how man has utilized the land and features formed on it can be
identified as cultural features. In the key of the topographic maps these cultural features
have been indicated mainly under the headings of boundaries, tourist information,
roads and paths, and railway lines. Some cultural features have been mainly included
under the headings of drainage, natural vegetation and general features.
The way how the distribution of human activities that is formed on the physical
landscape is represented by using different symbols and colors, can be understood by
reading the map.
Activity
Neatly draw the symbols that represent the cultural features under relevant main
headings after studying the conventional signs of a 1:50 000 topographic maps.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Types of Boundaries
All the administrative boundaries on 1: 50 000 topographic maps are
shown in red using different symbols. Though the boundaries of sanctuaries and
forest reserves are included among them features that belong to the physical
environment can be found in sanctuaries. It must be understood that though these
boundaries are seen on the maps , they are invisible cultural features on the land.
When you observe a map it will be clear to you that physical features like rivers,
mountain ranges are used as the boundaries that divide the administrative units.
Tourist information
Information like the rest house, the hotel, historical places necessary for the
tourists, are presented by symbols on the topographic maps. It is important to be well
aware of these symbols and colors which are used to represent each feature when
reading maps.
Roads
The symbols that represent roads on topographic maps are given under the
headings of roads and paths and railway lines. Though the recently constructed
express ways have not been shown on the maps, they will be included on the maps
printed in future.
Water Supply
The symbols that represent tanks and irrigation that show the water supply
in a certain region come under the cultural features. These features are shown by the
symbols under drainage.
Cultivated lands
Cultivated lands that come under cultural features are shown under vegetations
on topographical maps. The symbols which are used to identify the chief crops
cultivated like paddy, tea, rubber, coconut and other crops as well as home gardens
are included here. When cultivated lands are represented, paddy lands are shown in
green, home gardens in yellow, green symbols on a yellow background are used for
other crops. It is very important to have a correct identification of all crop cultivations
by symbols, when the landscape of the mapped area is interpreted.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Special Buildings
Special buildings come under the "other features" category. Permanent buildings
are shown using a small black square and special buildings are shown using a square a
bit larger than that. The name of the special building is mentioned on the map. Significant
public buildings are shown using symbols and they can be identified as public service
centres and religious buildings. The built up areas marked in pink on urban areas are
significant among the cultural features.
Different symbols used to depict cultural features are not drawn to a scale.
Therefore, they are to be considered only as symbols used to identify different cultural
features.
For free distribution
Map 9.3 - The cultural Features.
For free distribution
Activity
Studying the conventional signs on 1:50 000 topographic maps, draw and name the
cultural features represented on the map 9.3 using relevant colors and symbols.
Interpreting Maps
Both the physical landscape created by nature itself and the cultural
landscape that has been built on it by man over a longer period, are represented
by the 1: 50 000 topographic maps. Hence by reading a map it becomes clear
that there is an important relationship between the physical features and cultural
features of the mapped area. The establishment of the road pattern, agricultural
land use pattern, irrigation system and the settlement pattern compatible with
the relief pattern of a certain area can be shown as examples.
When topographic maps are observed a road pattern that spread straight
in the flat areas and a road pattern that runs through passes with bends in hilly
areas can be identified. The roads in hilly areas are mostly built along the river
valleys.
When the agricultural land use of the mapped area is considered, it
becomes clear that crops are grown to match the land. Wide paddy lands in
low plain areas and associated with river valleys , narrow long paddy lands in
river valleys in hilly areas , tea cultivation in hilly regions rubber cultivation
in gentle slope regions , coconut cultivation in coastal and suburb regions and
Chena cultivation close to the scrub forests in the districts of the Dry Zones
can be cited as example.
When the water supply of a certain region is considered, the features
like construction of large irrigation systems associated with the river valleys,
construction of tanks blocking the rivers that flow through the narrow gaps
by building dams joining the spurs of the ridges located on either side of the
rivers and cultivation of the lands located below the dam can be identified as
the cultural features formed compatible to the relief of the land.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
When maps are observed it is clear that the relief of any area influences
the formation of the human settlement pattern . While the settlements spread
over a wide area in plains, scattered small settlements can be found located
in valleys in hilly areas. When interpreting maps, attention must be focused
on both settlement pattern and also the type of settlement . According to the
distribution of settlements linear, cluster and a scattered settlement patterns
can be identified. A linear settlement pattern along the roads and narrow land
belts and cluster settlement patterns at road junctions can be seen.
According to the life pattern of the people different settlements like
tank settlements, fishing settlements, estate settlements can be identified.
Settlements are again divided as rural and urban settlements. While hospitals,
main post offices, main banks, courts, police stations are located in a town,
several roads also get connected there. Railway stations too are located at
some places. In topographic maps, such places are shown in pink as built up
areas. Rural settlements can be identified by sub post offices, other roads, cart
tracks, foot paths etc.
Physical features are mostly utilized in delimitation of the administrative
borders. It becomes clear when topographic maps are observed that the
administrative borders have been set along mountain ranges and rivers.
An idea about the social identity in the human community can be obtained
when interpreting maps. Presence of different types of religious centres
within a region itself, diversity of religions as well as type of communities can
be identified.
Activity
With the teacher’s advice, present the human and physical landscape of
your own region or where your school is located using conventional signs,
colors and symbols. Prepare a key to the conventional signs. Any land area
can be selected according to your preference.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Do the following exercises using the 1: 50 000 topographic maps supplied to you
on pages 139-143 in the text book itself.
Exercise -01
1. Write the relief features of the mapped area represented by the lines A-B, C-D,
E-F selecting them from the brackets.
i. A-B
(Convex slope, concave slope, gentle slope)
ii. C-D (spur, valley, gap)
iii. E-F (plain, undulated land, conical hill)
2. Identify and name the features represented by the numbers 01 -10
3. Mark whether following statements are correct or incorrect by writing “R” If
right and “W” if wrong.
i. The paddy cultivation of the region is conducted utilizing irrigation.
ii. A broad gauge double railway line distributed in the North Western
quarter of the mapped area.
iii. The length of the B 294 main road is roughly 9 km. ( Reference to the
Km posts).
iv. The elevation of the ridge located at the centre of the mapped area is
above 400m.
v. The Southwestern quarter of the mapped area is covered with scrub
lands and forests.
4. Name five public buildings, types of roads and types cultivation found in the
square marked on the map.
5. In which climatic zone is the mapped area located? Give reasons for this
identification.
6. What are the factors that should be considered when a short cut road is
constructed from Siyambalawe to Ulpothagama.
7. Draw the cross section of X-Y.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Exercise -02.
1. Identify and name the coastal features shown by 1-5 in the map.
2. Write the numbers which represent the following drainage patterns selecting
from the map. ( 5,6,7,8 are used).
² Meander
² Cut off Channel.
² Marshy Land.
² River Mouth.
Write whether following statements are correct or incorrect by writing “ R “ if
right and “ W “ if wrong.
i. Coconut is the main crop grown in the mapped area.
ii. Settlements are mainly distributed along the coastal region of the
mapped area.
iii. Total land area of the mapped region is seen flat in nature.
iv. A District Boundary runs in the north western quarter of the mapped
area.
v. The distance of the road B 465 that spreads northward from the place
where The Divisional Secretariat is located up to the first bridge
is 5 Km.
i. Name four main crops found in the mapped area.
ii. Explain the relationship between the crop cultivation and the relief.
5. State the area of the mapped region in square kilometers.
6. Name the physical and cultural features found in the square marked on the map.
7. State the latitudinal location of the place.
8. State three factors that can be utilized to develop the tourist industry in coastal
region.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Exercise -03.
1. According to the scale of the map how many centimeters are used to show the
distance of 1 Km.
2. Draw the linear scale to represent that scale. ( 1: 50 000)
3. Select the relevant number from 1-6 given in the map and re arranges the fol-
lowing drainage features in order.
² River valley.
² Braided river.
² Meander.
² Main River.
² Tributary.
² Watershed.
4. Name three religious places located within 1 km2 at the Ginigathhena Junction.
5. State whether following statements are right or wrong by writing “ R” if right
and “w” if wrong.
i. The mapped area belongs to the Central hills relief zone.
ii. The mapped area slopes towards the South east.
iii. Paddy is the main crop cultivation in the mapped area.
iv. B 25 road that runs close to South border runs with more conspicuous
bends.
v. The south west region of the mapped area is covered with scrub forests.
6. What is the maximum height of the southwestern region of the mapped area?
7. i. Name three physical features in the square marked on the map.
ii. State three industries that can be carried out utilizing them.
iii. State three factors that have contributed for the development of an urban
settlement in Hathdelagama.
8. Explain how the relief and the rivers have influenced the distribution of the
road network of the mapped area.
9. State two factors that you can present to determine the mapped area as a
catchment area.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Exercise -04.
1. State the physical features can be found at the places marked by 1,2,3,4,5 on
the map choosing from the following.
² Water pass/ Gap.
² Concave slope/ Convex slope.
² Valley/ Spur.
² Watershed/ Catchment area.
Isolated hill/ Mountain range.
2. State whether following statements are right or wrong by writing “ W” if
inwrong and “R” if right.
i. Total western half of the mapped area shows mountain features.
ii. A boundary of a forest reserve can be seen in the north east quarter of
the mapped region.
iii. The maximum height of the land area located east of the main road
rises above the 200 m.
iv.The distance of the road from the north border to the first bridge is 3 km.
v. A provincial boundary can be seen close to the northern border.
4. Name the features shown by C, D, E, F, on the map choosing from the brackets
in alphabetical order.
(Abandon tank, Tank, Spot height, Boundary of sanctuary, Culvert, Bridge,
Foot path, Urban council boundary.)
5. State respectively what are represented by 70-40', 270 values on the inner
border of the map.
i. .State the distance in Km that a traveler will have to cover when walking
from southern border to Northern border along the main road.
ii. Write five cultural features can be found either side of the road.
iii.Name the crops cultivated either side of the road.
iv.Name two institutions that supply the agricultural services encountered
by a traveler who travels along the road.
7. Present the factors that contribute for the existence of western half of the
mapped area undeveloped.
For free distribution
For free distribution
8. Write two reasons to show the relationship between relief and the land use of
the mapped area.
9. Write three factors that have contributed for the distribution of settlements in
the central part of the mapped area.
Exercise -05.
1. Draw the figure of direction of the metric maps.
2. Write the relevant numbers of the following landforms choosing from the map
² Conical hill
² Rock outcrop
² Meander.
² Steep slope.
² Longitudinal valley.
² Braided river.
² Valley.
² Spur.
3. What is the elevation from the sea level the dam of the Rantambe reservoir is
located?
4. What is the width of the river Mahaveli at the pace marked “A”.
i. The highest place of the mapped region is located close to the southern
border. State the height of it in meters.
ii. Name the direction where the lowest region of the mapped area is located.
i. What is indicated by+ located close to the western border of the mapped area.
ii. Accordingly, state the latitudinal location of that place.
i. Name respectively the two valleys through which Uma Oya and River Ma
haveli flow in the mapped area.
ii. Write two factors that have contributed to form such a drainage pattern.
8. What is the physical feature utilized in determining the provincial boundary.
9. Name three industries can be opened in the mapped area and present reasons
for it.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
10. What is the common agricultural land use in the southwestern quarter of the
mapped area?
Draw the cross section of X-Y line.
Map for the exercise -01
The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka.
Do the exercises given based on it.
1(50"000
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map for the exercise -02
The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka.
Do the exercises given based on it.
1(50"000
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map for the exercise -03
The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka.
Do the exercises given based on it.
For free distribution
1(50"000
For free distribution
Map for the exercise -04
The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka.
Do the exercises given based on it.
1(50"000
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Map for the exercise -05
The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka.
Do the exercises given based on it.
800 55’
1(50"000
For free distribution
For free distribution
Bibliography and Sources
10 - 11 iudc wOHhkh úIhh i|yd is;shï wOHhkh ^1999&" wOHdmk
m%ldYk fomd¾;fïka;=j'
² fuá%la is;shï" Y%S ,xld ñkqï fomd¾;fïka;=j'
Glossary
Topographical map
- N+ ,laIK is;shu
- ChÂÍUP¨ £h®
Physical features
- fN!;sl ,laIK
- ö£ÍvP A®\[PÒ
² Cultural features
- ixialD;sl ,laIK
- £s£õmk A®\[PÒ
² Relief features
- N+ úIu;d ,laIK
- uøµz÷uõØÓ A®\[PÒ
² Contour lines
- ifudaÉp f¾Ld
- \©²¯µU ÷PõkPÒ
Plain
- ;eks;,d
Spot height
- ia:dkSh Wi
- \©öÁÎ
- Ch E¯µ®
² Undulating lands
- /<s ìï
- öuõhµø» {»®
² Highlands
² Valley
- Wia ìï
- ksïkh
- fkrej
- E¯º {»®
- £ÒÍzuõUS
- _Ák
² Mountain range
- l÷jeáh
- ©ø»zöuõhº
² Ridge
- fy,ajeáh
- £õøÓz öuõhº
Isolated hill
- yqol,d lkao
- uÛUSßÖ
² Conical hill
- fld;a lkao
- T®¦U SßÖ
Escarpment
- fudfydr nEjqu
- K[PÀ \õ´Ä
² Gentle slope
- uo nEjqu
- ö©ß \õ´Ä
² Convex slope
- W;a;, nEjqu
- SÂÄa \õ´Ä
² Concave slope
- wj;, nEjqu
- SÈÄa \õ´Ä
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Gap
- lfmd,a, - PnÁõ´
² Cross section
- yrialv - £UP¨£õºøÁ
² River system
- .x.d uKav,h
- BØÖz öuõSv
Transverse valley
- ;S¾hla ksïkh
- SÖUS¨ £ÒÍzuõUS
Longitudinal valley
- wdh; ksïkh
- ö|kUS¨ £ÒÍzuõUS
² Water divide
- Èh fn;au
- }º¨¤› {»®
² Meander
- .xoÕrh
- ª¯õ¢uº ÁøÍÄ
² Marshy land
- j.=re ìï
- \x¨¦ {»®
² Braided river
- yevm¨ .x.dj
- ¤ßÛ¯ BÖ
² Distributories
- wmYdLd
- QøÍ BÖ
² Radial drainage pattern - wÍh c,jyk rgdj
- Bøµ ÁiPõÀ £õ[S
² Dendritic drainage pattern - YdÇh c,jyk rgdj
- ©µ {Pº ÁiPõÀ £õ[S
Trellised drainage pattern - cd,dldr c,jyk rgdj
- AÎ¯øh¨¦ ÁiPõÀ £õ[S
Lagoon
² Bay
- l,mqj
- fndlal
Point / Cape
- ;=vqj
- PhÜ÷µ›
- Shõ
- •øÚ
Sand bar
- je,smrh
- ©nØÓøh
Island
- ¥m;a
² Coast
- fjr< bu
- Pøµ÷¯õµ®
² Administrative boundary - mßmd,k udhsï
- {ºÁõP GÀø»
For free distribution
For free distribution
1010 Using Graphs to Represent Data
Like in studying any other subject, in studying geography too statistical
tables are used a great deal to collect necessary data and information. The graph
can be considered as a medium that is used to understand the information present in
statistical tables easily and quickly.
The basic objective of this chapter is to make one understand about the simple
line graph, multiple bar graph, and the simple divided circles which are
used to represent data.
When a statistical table is presented in a graph, it is important to have a
good understanding about the nature of the data and the most suitable type of graph
necessary to represent it.
Simple Line Graph
Presentation of data in a statistical table by lines is done in a line graph.
This line graph is much used to represent the variables that change with time.
The temperature, atmospheric pressure, the growth of the population and the state
revenue are some examples of the variables that are represented by simple line
graphs. Simple line graphs are mostly used because of the ease in drawing them and
also because the trends could be instantly understood.
The factors that should be considered when graph is drawn
² Selection of a suitable scale according to the statistical table given.
Marking time on the horizontal axis and the relevant variables on the vertical
axis.
Setting the vertical scale taking the minimum of the relevant statistical table
as zero and the round number next to the highest value of the statistics as the
maximum.
² Marking “0” at the foot of the vertical axis and “100” at the top when
percentage values are represented.
² Writing a suitable heading according to the statistics in the table.
² Using a suitable color for the line that a single variable is represented.
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
The graph drawn based on the data of the table 10.1 is shown below.
Table 10 .1 Tourists Arrivals 2006- 2011
559,603
494,008
438,475
447,890
654,476
855,975
Graph 10.1 - Simple Line Graph
Source - Annual Report, Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 2012.
Activities
1. Draw a simple line graph using a
suitable statistical table.
2. State two factors reflected by the graph.
The basic features of a graph
² Title.
Scale (Vertical &
Horizontal)
² Key
Frame.
Source.
Multiple Bar Graphs
Presentation of a statistical table using bars is done by a bar graph. These
bars can be drawn either horizontally or vertically. Multiple bar graphs are used
when the data of several variables are presented. A multiple bar graph is more
suitable for the representation of the data like the annual production of several
goods and number of different vehicles registered over several years etc. Ability
to identify the numerical value of a variable easily, ability to compare several
variables of a year and the ability to study the periodical trends of those variables
comparatively are the benefits of this method of graph.
For free distribution
For free distribution
When multiple bar graphs are drawn, the following factors should be
considered.
² Determining the vertical scale according to the maximum and minimum
values of the statistical table.
² Marking the time on horizontal axis and the amount on vertical axis.
² Setting starting point of the vertical axis as zero (0).
² Drawing the bars of relevant years joining to each other with equal width.
² Showing by separating the group of bars of a year from the bars of other year.
² Showing the bars of the same variable relating to a particular year by the
same color or design.
² Showing used colors or designs by a key.
Table 10.2. - The composition of gross domestic products by sectors.(At
current cost-Rs. Billion)
Service
Industry
Agriculture
Graph 10.2 - Multiple Bar Graph.
Source - Socio Economic Data of Sri Lanka 2012
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
According to the graph, the which variable depicts the heighest growth
during the period of 2006 - 2011
Activities
1. Name the variables represented in the graph.
2. What is the development of that variable during 2006- 2011 in rupees billions.
Assignment
² Prepare a multiple bar graph based on a statistical table found in the Central
Bank Annual Report or on any other statistical table.
State the temporal variations of the each of the variable.
Divided Circles
The circle graph that is used to represent the composition of the variables
included in a certain statistical table is known as a divided circle graph. In this
graph, total value of all the variables is considered 360◦ and according to the
value of each variable, 360◦ is divided into sub parts. The divided circle graph is
most suitable to represent data like composition of ethnic groups of a country,
religious composition, and export and import composition.
The composition of variables as well as their proportion could be
understood comparatively in a divided circle graph.
When drawing a divided circle graph the following steps should be
considered.
² Drawing a circle using a suitable radius for the graph.
² Deciding the value of angle of the each variable considering the value of the
total variables of 360◦.
² Finding the value of each variable according to the percentage value when
composition is given in percentage considering 360◦ value of the circle as
² Marking the angular values clockwise according to the size from the base line
that is drawn from the centre of the circle until it meets the circumference
towards North.
² Placing at the end, If there is a variable marked as "others".
² Completing the drawing of the graph by setting the key with the colors used,
to show the composition, scale, heading and the source of data.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Table 10.3. - The Composition of the agricultural export- 2011 (Rs. Millions)
Percentage % Value according to
Coconut
Rubber
Other Agricultural
crops
Agricultural export
164,869
29,394
22,811
62,392
10.5%
22.3%
279,466
Source- Central Bank Annual Report 2012.
Activities
1. Name the composition of the
variables represented in the graph.
2. What is the variable that claims the
highest amount of exports?
3. State two uses of this graph.
Assignment
Represent the data taken either from the
Annual Central Bank Report or from any
other suitable statistical table by using a
divided circle graph.
Graph 10.3 - Sample Divided Circle graph
Source : Socio Economic Data of
Sri Lanka - 2012
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
Bibliography and Sources
² Y%S ,xld uy nexl= jd¾;dj ^2012&'
² Y%S ,xld iudc wd¾Ól o;a; -^2012&" uy nexl= jd¾;dj'
Glossary
² Representation of data
- o;a; ksrEmKh
- uµÄPøÍ ÂÍUSuÀ
² Graphs
- m%ia;dr
- Áøµ¦PÒ
Simple Line Graphs
- ir, f¾Ld m%ia;drh
- \õuõµn ÷Põmk Áøµ¦PÒ
² Multiple Line Graphs
- nyq ;Sre m%ia;drh
- £À £õº Áøµ¦PÒ
Simple Divided Circle Graphs - ir, fnÿï jD;a; m%ia;drh - \õuõµn ¤›UP¨£mh Ámh
Áøµ¦PÒ
² Variables
- új,Hh
- ©õÔPÒ
² Horizontal axis
- ;sria wlaIh
- Qøh¯a_
² Vertical axis
- isria wlaIh
- ö\[Szua_
² Minimum
- wjuh
- Y+kHh
- CÈÄ¨ ö£Ö©õÚ®
- §a]¯¨ ö£Ö©õÚ®
² Maximum
- Wmßuh
- Ea]¨ ö£Ö©õÚ®
Percentage
- m%;sY;h
- \uÃu®
² Gross domestic product
- o< foaYSh ksIamdÈ;h
- ö©õzu EÒ|õmk EØ£zv
For free distribution
For free distribution
Ethnic composition
- jd¾.sl ixhq;sh
- CÚŸv¯õÚ EÒÍhUP®
² Religious composition
- wd.ñl ixhq;sh
- \©¯Ÿv¯õÚ EÒÍhUP®
Export composition
- wmkhk ixhq;sh
- HØÖ©v EÒÍhUP®
Import composition
- wdkhk ixhq;sh
- CÓUS©v EÒÍhUP®
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution
For free distribution