SCIENCE
Grade 11
Part - I
Educational Publications Department
Visit http://smarttextbook.epd.gov.lk to access and download the smart textbook
produced in parallel to the Grade 11 Science textbook.
First Print
Second Print
Third Print
Fourth Print
Fifth Print
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
All Rights Reserved
ISBN 978-955-25-0314-6
Published by Educational Publications Department
Printed by Print Palace Lanka
Colombo Road, Horagasmulla, Divulapitiya.
ii
The National Anthem of Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka
Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya
Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha
Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
Oba we apa vidya
Obamaya apa sathya
Oba we apa shakthi
Apa hada thula bhakthi
Oba apa aloke
Apage anuprane
Oba apa jeevana we
Apa mukthiya oba we
Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha
Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara
Eka mavakage daru kela bevina
Yamu yamu vee nopama
Prema vada sema bheda durerada
Namo, Namo Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
iii
wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjda
tl ksjfiys fjfikd
tl mdge;s tl reêrh fõ
wm lh ;=< ÿjkd
tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhda
tl f,i tys jefvkd
Ôj;a jk wm fuu ksjfia
fid¢k isáh hq;= fõ
ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkS
fj<S iu.s oñkS
rka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;d
lsis l, fkdu Èrkd
wdkkao iurfldaka
J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®
Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®
|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®
Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®
AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®
JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ®
|ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷»
|»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ
¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hß
JØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀ
ö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á
¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.
BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß
PÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.
iv
Being innovative, changing with right knowledge
Be a light to the country as well as to the world.
Message from the Hon. Minister of Education
The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took
place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid
development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner
of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an
environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career
opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan
Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.
This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book
properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free
textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.
Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country,
the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the
technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I
believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.
It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your
education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that
you reach the optimum social stratum through education.
I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured
citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.
Akila Viraj Kariyawasam
Minister of Education
v
Foreword
The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming
more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological
development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to
human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices.Therefore,
it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information
according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process
by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is
not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain
a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop
values and to obtain learning experiences.
The government in its realization of the concept of free education has
offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that
you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I
sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become
a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the
country.
I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the
editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications
Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.
W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,
Commissioner General of Educational Publications,
Educational Publications Department,
Isurupaya,
Battaramulla.
2019.04.10
vi
Monitoring and Supervision
W. M. Jayantha Wikramanayaka
Direction
W. A. Nirmala Piyaseeli
Co-ordination
K. D. Bandula Kumara
H. Chandima Kumari De Zoysa
Y. M. Priyangika Kumari Yapa
Panel of Editors
1. Prof. Sunethra Karunarathne
- Commissioner General
Educational Publications Department
- Commissioner (Development)
Educational Publications Department
- Deputy Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Professor
University of Peradeniya
2. Dr. M. K. Jayanande
- Senior Lecturer
3. Dr. S. D. M. Chinthaka
4. Prof. Chula Abeyrathna
5. M. P. Vipulasena
6. R. S. J. P. Uduporuwa
7. P. Malavipathirana
Department of Physics
University of Colombo
- Senior Lecturer
Department of Chemistry
University of Colombo
- Associate Professor
Department of Physics
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
- Director (Science)
Ministry of Education
- Director (Science)
National Institute of Education
- Senior Lecturer
National Institute of Education
8. P. Achuthan
- Assistant Lecturer
9. G. G. P. S. Perera
10. K. D. Bandula Kumara
11. H. Chandima Kumari De Zoysa
12. Y. M. Priyangika Kumari Yapa
National Institute of Education
- Assistant Lecturer
National Institute of Education
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
vii
Panel of Writers
1. Dr. K. Ariyasinghe
2. Muditha Athukorala
- Professional writer (Science)
- Teacher Service
Prajapathi Vidyalaya, Horana
3. W. G. A.Raveendra Weragoda
- Teacher Service
Sri Rahula National College - Alawwa
4. G. G. S. Godekumara
- In service Advisor
Zonal Education ) Office - Dehiattakandiya
5. Nelum Wijesiri
- In service Advisor
Zonal Education Office - Sri Jayewardenepura
6. M. A. P. Munasinghe
- Chief Project Officer (Retired)
National Institute of Education
7. A. W. A. Siriwardana
- In service Advisor (Retired)
8. K. N. N. Thilakawardana
- Teacher Service
Ananda College, Colombo
9. H. S. K.Wijayathilaka
- Sri Lanka Educational Administrative Service (Retired)
10. Ananda Athukorala
- Teacher Service (Retired)
11. J. Emmanual
12. N. Vageeshamurthi
13. M. M. S. Zareena
14. S. R. Jayakumara
15. K. D. Bandula Kumara
Language Editing
1. I. A. M. Afsan
2. M. R. S. K. Ganegoda
Technical Assistance
1. P. W. Lahiru Madushan
2. A. Asha Amali Weerarathna
3. W. A. Poorna Jayamini
- Principal
St Anthony's Boy's College, Colombo 13
- Director of Education (Retired)
- Teacher Service
K/ Budurtheen Mahamood Ladies College - Kandy
- Teacher Service
Royal College - Colombo 07
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Assistant Commissioner
Educational Publications Department
- Teacher Service
Sri Jayewardenapura Balika Vidyalaya.
Kotte.
- Educational Publications Department
- Educational Publications Department
- Educational Publications Department
viii
Contents
1. Living tissues
1.1 Plant tissues
1.2 Animal tissues
2. Photosynthesis
2.1 Factors that affect photosynthesis
2.2 Products of photosynthesis
2.3 Importance of photosynthesis
3. Mixtures
3.1 Type of mixtures
3.2 Composition of mixtures
3.3 Separation of compounds in mixtures
4. Waves and their applications
4.1 Mechanical Waves
4.2 Electromagnetic Waves
4.3 Sound
5. Geometrical Optics
5.1 Reflection of light
5.2 Curved (Spherical) Mirrors
5.3 Refraction of Light
5.4 Lenses
Page
01
01
10
20
21
22
28
30
30
40
52
72
73
80
87
105
105
108
119
126
ix
6. Biological processes in human body
143
6.1 Process of food digestion
6.2 Process of respiration
6.3 Process of excretion
6.4 Process of blood circulation
6.5 Coordination and homeostasis in human
143
150
157
163
172
7. Acids, bases and salts
190
7.1 Acids
7.2 Bases
7.3 Salts
7.4 Neutralisation
190
193
197
198
8. Heat changes associated with chemical reactions
202
x
Living tissues
Biology
Living tissues
Biology
01
You have studied about tissues as one of the organizational levels of multicellular
organisms in grade 10. You will learn more about tissues in this chapter.
1.1 Plant tissues
Let's do the activity 1.1 to study about plant tissues.
Activity 1.1
Materials required :- Thin peel of lower epidermis of betel leaf, thin section
of a potato tuber, thin cross section of a stem of a plant like Balsam.
Method :-
² Prepare temporary slides using above plant materials.
² Observe them under microscope.
² Try to identify tissues formed by cells with the help of
your teacher.
Figure. 1.1 - View of different plant tissues under optical microscope
You may have observed that plant tissues are of different forms. Animal tissues are
also of different forms. It is observable that different cell types are present in living
beings and similar cells are arranged together.
A group of cells with a common origin that has been modified to perform
particular functions in the body is known as a tissue.
1
For free distribution
Biology
Living tissues
²
Classification of plant tissues
Let's do the activity 1.2 to study further about how tissues are oraganized in plant
organs.
Activity - 1.2
Materials required :- Prop root of Banion/ Stilt root of Pandanus/ Stilt root
of Rampe.
Method :-
² Observe the external view of the growing
tips of above roots.
² Use a hand lens to observe them.
Figure 1.2 - External view of a root
We can identify the nature of a growing root from the above observation. Growing
part is soft and light coloured. Mature part is rough and dark coloured. This is
because of the nature of tissues.
Figure 1.3 shows the microscopic view of longitudinal section of such a root.
It is observed that region A-A' has cells with the
ability of cell division. Region B-B' contain
different cell types that are different in nature
from cells in region A-A'.
Plant tissues can be categorised using different
criteria. Plant tissues can be divided into two
groups according to the ability of cell division.
²
²
Meristematic tissues
Permanent tissues
Permanent tissues can be found in region B-B'
and Meristematic tissues in region A-A' as
shown in figure 1.3.
B
A
B'
A'
š
Root cap
Figure 1.3 - Microscopic view of
longitudinal section of root apex
For free distribution
2
Living tissues
1.1.1 Meristematic tissues
Biology
The tissues with cells that divide actively by mitosis to produce new cells are called
meristematic tissues. These cells are not differentiated. The growth of plants takes
place due to activity of meristematic tissues.
Features of meristematic tissues
² This tissue consists of small sized living cells
² No intercellular spaces or intercellular spaces are not prominent
² There is a distinct nucleus in each cell
² Absence of large central vacuole but small vacuoles may be present
² Absence of chloroplasts
² Large number of mitochondria are present
Meristematic tissues are present in specific locations of the plant. They are of three
types.
Apical Meristems
Intercalary meristems
Apical meristems
Apical meristems are found in shoot apex,
root apex and axillary buds. Plant increases its
height due to the activity of this tissue.
Lateral Meristems
A
B
Figure 1.4 - Locations of meristematic
tissues
Intercalary meristems
Intercalary meristems are found at nodes. The
length of internode increases due to the activity
of the above tissue. They are found in plants of
grass family.
Lateral meristems
Lateral meristems are present laterally in the
stem and roots of plant. They are found parallel
to the longitudinal axis of plant. The diameter
of the plant increases due to the activity of this
tissue. Cambium tissue found in dicots is a
lateral meristematic tissue.
3
For free distribution
Biology
1.1.2 Permanent tissues
Living tissues
Do the activity 1.3 to identify different types of tissues of plant stem.
Activity -- 1'3
Materials required :- Pumpkin / Tridex plant stem, A glass slide,
A microscope
Method :-
² Observe the cross section of above plant stem using a microscope
²
Identify the different tissue types present in them
Figure 1.5 - Microscopic view of cross section of dicot stem
A tissue that lost its ability to divide and specialized to perform a particular function
is known as a permanent tissue.
According to the nature of the permanent tissues, it can be grouped into two.
² Simple Permanent tissues - One type of cells collected together
² Complex Permanent tissues - Different types of cells collected together
²
Simple permanent tissues
The tissue is composed of similar cells. According to the shape of cell and the nature
of cell wall, three types of simple permanent tissues as parenchyma, collenchyma
and sclerenchyma can be identified in plants (Figure 1.6).
Parenchyma
Collenchyma
Sclerenchyma
Figure 1.6 - Simple permanent tissue types
For free distribution
4
Living tissues
Biology
Parenchyma
The tissue that forms the soft parts of the plant body is the parenchyma tissue. This
is the most abundant tissue found in the plant.
Features of Parenchyma tissue
Intercellular space
Nucleus
Thin peripheral layer of
cytoplasm
Large central vacuole
Thin primary
cellulose wall
Intercellular space
Nucleus
Vacuole
² Parenchyma tissue consists
of living cells.
² Cells
isodiametric
large
are
(spherical) with a
central vacuole.
present
is
peripherally in the cytoplasm.
² The cell wall is thin and made
² Nucleus
²
up of cellulose.
Intercellular
present.
spaces
are
Cross section of parenchyma
Longitudinal section of parenchyma
Figure 1.7 - Parenchyma tissues
Locations of parenchyma tissues
² Cortex and pith of plant stem
² Fleshy parts of fruits
² Leaves (mesophylls)
Functions of parenchyma
² Pith and cortex of roots
² Seeds (endosperm)
² Photosynthesis - Palisade and spongy mesophylls in plant leaves contain
chlorophyll within chloroplasts. Photosynthesis takes
place within these chloroplasts.
² Food storage - Food is stored in some parenchyma tissues and they are
called as storage tissues.
E.g. : Potato tuber, Carrot and Sweet potato roots,
Papaw and Banana fruits.
² Storage of water - Specially xerophytic plants store water in Parenchyma
tissue.
E.g. : Aloe leaves, Bryophyllum leaves, Cactus cladode
² Providing support - Herbaceous plants like Balsam absorb water into
vacuoles of the parenchyma cells. Thereby cells
become turgid and provide mechanical support to the
plant.
5
For free distribution
Biology
Collenchyma
Living tissues
Collenchyma tissue provides mechanical strength and support to the plant body.
They are modified parenchyma cells.
Thickend corners of the
cell wall
Cross section of a
collenchyma tissue
Nucleus
Longitudinal section of a
collenchyma tissue
Figure 1.8 - Collenchyma tissue
Features of collenchyma tissue
² Collenchyma tissue consists of living cells.
² Cells possess a cytoplasm, nucleus and central vacuole.
² Generally cells are elongated and polygonal in cross section.
² The corners of the cell walls are thickened.
²
Intercellular spaces may present or may not present.
Locations of collenchyma
The collenchyma forms a cylindrical tissue inner to the epidermis of herbaceous
stems. They are found in the veins of dicot leaves.
Functions of collenchyma
1' Support -
Collenchyma provides mechanical support to dicot plant
stem, before the formation of wood. (Provides mechanical
support to herbs)
This tissue provides support to the plant leaves by the
collenchyma in veins.
2' Photosynthesis - Chloroplasts are found in the collenchyma of immature
dicot stems. Photosynthesis is carried out by those cells.
For free distribution
6
Living tissues
Sclerenchyma
Lignifed
cell walls
Lumen
Pit
Biology
sclereid
Cross section of fibers
Longitudinal section of sclerenchyma
tissue
Figure 1.9 - Sclerenchyma tissue
Sclerenchyma tissue helps in providing mechanical strength and support to the
plant body. This tissue has two types of cells as sclereids and sclerenchyma fibres.
Features of sclerenchyma tissue
² Sclerenchyma tissue consists of dead cells.
² Lignin is deposited on the cellulose cell wall.
² Cells are tightly packed. Therefore, no intercellular spaces.
² Cell wall is evenly thickened and forms a central lumen.
Locations of sclerenchyma tissue
Fibres present in xylem are called as xylem fibres and in phloem as phloem fibres.
Other than above, coconut fibres, agave fibres and cotton wool are made up of
fibres (sclerenchyma)
Selereids are found in endocarp of coconut, Kaduru and mango fruits, the pericarp
of guava fruit and in pear fruit and seed coat of coffee and dates.
Functions of sclerenchyma
² Provide support to the plant body
7
For free distribution
Biology
Living tissues
²
Complex permanent tissues
Different types of cells together form a complex permanent tissue. Two complex
permanent tissues as xylem and phloem can be identified in plants (Figure 1.10).
phloem
Xylem
Xylem and phloem are found in
vascular systems of root, stem and
leaves of the plant.
Figure. 1.10 - Complex permanent tissue
Xylem tissue
Parenchyma
Xylem
fibre
Tracheids
Vessel element
Figure 1.11 - Xylem tissue
This tissue is composed of four different types of cells.
Vessels
Tracheids
Xylem
parenchyma
Xylem
fibre
² Xylem vessel element
² Tracheids
² Fibres
² Parenchyma cells
Xylem vessel elements are cylindrical elongated cells. Xylem vessel element
stack on top of the others and the cross walls are dissolved to form a continuous
xylem vessel. This tubular structure helps in transportation of water in plants.
Tracheids are elongated, spindle shaped cells. They also help in transportation
of water. Xylem fibers are narrower and shorter than tracheids. Xylem vessels,
For free distribution
8
Living tissues
Biology
tracheids and xylem fibers become dead due to lignification of cell walls. They
provide support to the xylem tissue. Xylem parenchyma are living cells with a
thin cell wall. They involve in food storage.
Functions of xylem
² Transportation of water and minerals to the plant body which are absorbed
by plant roots.
² Providing of mechanical support to plant body.
Phloem tissue
Sieve plate
Phloem parenchyma
Companion cell
Sieve tube element
Sieve plate pores
Sieve tube
Parenchyma cell
Companion cell
Sieve plate
Sieve tube element
Figure. 1.12 - Longitudinal section of the
phloem tissue
Figure. 1.13 - Cross section of the
phloem tissue
Phloem tissue is composed of four different types of cells.
² Sieve tube elements
² Companion cells
² Phloem fibres
² Phloem parenchyma
The sieve tube elements fuse end to end and the cross walls are incompletely
dissolved to form a sieve tube. The cross walls in these sieve tubes are called
sieve plates. Sieve tubes transport food (mainly sucrose) throughout the plant, as a
solution.
Companion cells are elongated cells associated with sieve tube elements. The
nucleus of the companion cell controls the activities of the sieve tube elements
(sieve tube elements lack a nucleus). Sieve tube elements, companion cells and
phloem parenchyma are living cells whereas phloem fibres are dead and found
scattered in phloem tissue.
Functions of phloem tissue
The food synthesized in the leaves are transported throughout the plant body by this
tissue (Translocation).
9
For free distribution
Biology
Assignment 1.1
Living tissues
Compare structural and functional characteristics of phloem and xylem.
Include them in a table.
1.2 Animal tissues
The animal body is also made up of different types of cells.
Example :- The human body is made up of about 210 different types of cells.
There are groups of cells with common origin to perform a particular function in
the multicellular animal body. Main types of animal tissues are given below.
² Epithelial tissue
² Connective tissue
² Muscle tissue
² Nervous tissue
Connective
tissue
Nervous tissue
Bone tissue
Cardiac muscle tissue
Epithelial tissue
Smooth muscle tissue
Figure 1.14 - Different tissues in human body
For free distribution
10
Living tissues
1.2.1 Epithelial tissue
Biology
This is the tissue that lines up the free surfaces (internal and external) of the
vertebrate body. Some of them are composed of single layer of cells and the others
are with several cell layers.
Features of epithelial tissues
Tightly packed cells
Nucleus
Basement membrane
Figure 1.15 - Epithelial tissue
² The cells are placed on a basement membrane
² The cells are tightly packed
² A nerve supply is present within the tissue but there is no blood supply
The epithelial tissue is classified according to the shape of the cell and the number
of cell layers.
Examples for several locations of epithelial tissues are given below.
² Wall of blood capillaries
² Thyroid gland
² Lining of nasal cavity
² Wall of urinary bladder
² Skin (Epidermis)
Functions of epithelial tissue
² Lining up of free surfaces and protection - Protects the internal organs from
pressure, friction and microbes
² Absorptive function - The epithelium of digestive tract absorbs digestive
end products
² Perception of stimuli - The epithelium of tongue and nose, detect taste and
smell senses
² Secretory function - Secretion of mucous by the lining epithelium of
respiratory tract
² Filtering function - Epithelium of Bowman's capsule in nephrons, filters
blood
11
For free distribution
Biology
1.2.2 Connective tissue
Living tissues
Connective tissue is composed of
different types of cells and fibres.
fibres are
These cells and
embedded in a large matrix.
Most
connective
possess nerve and blood supply.
tissues
Connective tissue
under skin
Bones
Cartilage
Blood
Figure 1.16 - Different Connective tissue present in
human arm
The connective tissues provide connection between tissues and organs and provide
support too.
E.g. :- Blood tissue, Bone tissue
Blood tissue
Blood is a special connective tissue. The speciality is that the matrix (plasma) is not
secreted by the blood cells. Blood tissue helps in maintaining proper connection
between organs and tissue of the human body.
Features of blood tissue
²
²
²
Blood is composed of a fluid matrix. Matrix
is called plasma
red
The matrix contains cells called
blood cells (erythrocytes) and white blood
cells (leucocytes) and cellular fragments
called platelets
Fibres are not found always but during
blood clotting they appear
Figure 1.17 - Blood tissue
Functions of blood tissue
² Transportation of materials - Respiratory gases, nutrients, excretory materials
and hormones are transported to the relevant
organs
² Protection - White blood cells destroy
foreign bodies
(Microbes) by phagocytosis and by producing
antibodies
² Maintenance of homeostasis
For free distribution
12
Living tissues
1.2.3 Muscle tissue
Biology
Muscle tissue is one of the main tissues that makes up the human body. Muscle tissue
is made up of muscle cells or muscle fibres. These muscle fibres possess contraction
and relaxation ability. Not like epithelial tissue, the muscle tissue possesses a good
blood supply. Therefore muscle tissue receives oxygen and nutrients at a high rate.
Muscle tissue acts as one of the effectors in responding in coordination.
Muscle tissue is of three types,
² Smooth muscle tissue
² Skeletal muscle tissue
² Cardiac muscle tissue
Assignment 1.2
Compare the characteristics of different muscle tissues.
Smooth muscle tissue
Smooth muscle tissue is made up of smooth muscle cells. This tissue is
found in the walls of organs with cavities.
Example :- Walls of digestive tract, uterus, blood vessels and bladder
Features of smooth muscle cell
Plasma
membrane
Figure 1.18 - smooth muscle tissue
Nucleus
²
²
²
These cells are spindle shaped. The
cells are unbranched
These cells have one nucleus at the
centre. No striations
These cells do not become fatigue
quickly. They
controlled
involuntarily
are
13
For free distribution
Biology
Skeletal muscle tissue
Living tissues
Skeletal muscle tissue is made up of skeletal muscle fibres. These are mostly
associated with skeletal system. The skeletal muscles help in locomotion and
movements of chordates.
Features of skeletal muscle fibres
Skeletal muscular
fibre
Nucleus
Plasma membrane
Figure 1.19 - Skeletal muscular tissue
² Skeletal muscle fibres are long, cylindrical,
unbranched cells.
² They are multinucleate cells with striations.
The nuclei present peripherally, and many
mitochondria are present.
² These cells are voluntarily controlled and
become fatigue easily.
E.g. :- Bicep muscle, Tricep muscle, Muscles in leg, Facial muscles
Cardiac muscle tissue
Cardiac muscle tissue is made up of cardiac muscle cells. It is exclusively found in
the vertebrate heart.
Features of cardiac muscle fibres
Intercalated disc
Nucleus
Plasma membrane
Figure 1.20 - Cardiac muscle tissue
² Cardiac muscle cells are uninucleate,
striated and short cells
²
Intercalated discs are present among
cells
² They never become fatigue. They
contract rhythmically
² They are involuntarily controlled
For free distribution
14
Living tissues
1.2.4 Nervous tissue
Biology
Cell body
Node of
Ranvier
Synapsis
vesicles
Axon
Dendrites
Nucleus
Figure 1.21- Structure of a typical neuron
Myelin sheath
It is an important tissue found in chordates body. The structural unit of nervous
tissue is nerve cell or neuron. Neurons are specialised to transmit impulses.
Features of neuron
² Neuron is composed of two parts. They are cell body and nerve fibres.
² Nucleus, mitochondria, golgi body and endoplasmic reticulum are found in
the cell body.
² Axon arises from the cell body as a single process. The axon transmits
impulses away from the cell body.
² Slender process called dendrites receive stimuli and transmit impulses to the
cell body.
² Most of the axons in chordates are myelinated. Myelin sheath is not continuous
and the interrupted places are known as nodes of Ranvier. The myelin sheath
increases the speed of transmission of impulses.
Functions of neurons
The function of the neuron is to receive the information from the receptors (eye, ear,
nose, tongue, skin) or another neuron and to transmit them to the effector (muscles)
or to another neuron.
According to the function of the neuron, they can be divided into three types as
follows (Figure 1.22).
² Sensory neuron
² Inter neuron
² Motor neuron
15
For free distribution
Biology
Living tissues
Sensory neuron
Inter neuron
Motor neuron
Figure 1.22 - Types of neurons
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
Sensory neuron
The cell body of the sensory neuron is present at the middle of the nerve fibers.
The cell bodies are present inside ganglion. The dendrites are present at the
sensory organs and the axon is present in the central nervous system. Ganglion
is a structure formed by the collection of cell bodies. They transmit impulses
from sensory organs to the central nervous system.
Motor neuron
A motor neuron possesses a star shaped cell body with many fibres. One of
them is the axon and it is long. Sometimes it is greater than 1m in length. The
other fibres and cell body are found within the central nervous system.
The function of the motor neuron is to transmit impulses from central nervous
system to effector (muscles).
Inter neuron
The whole neuron is present within the central nervous system. The axons are
short. Many dendrites are present.
The inter neuron connects the sensory neuron with motor neuron.
For free distribution
16
Living tissues
Summary
Biology
17
For free distribution
Biology
Living tissues
Exercise
^1& Underline the correct answer
I. Out of the cells and tissues given below which type is of dead cells?
1. Fibres
3. Collenchyma
2. Parenchyma
4. Sieve tube element
II. Which of the following is a complex tissue?
1. Parenchyma 2. Xylem
3. Sclerenchyma
4. Collenchyma
III. Features mentioned below could be observed in a plant tissue under a
microscope. Identify the tissue.
²
²
²
Isodiametric cells
Large vacuoles
Living cells
1. Sclerenchyma
2. Collenchyma
3. Xylem
4. Parenchyma
iv. A characteristic of skeletal muscle fibre is,
1. Spindle shaped
3. Uninucleate
2. Cross striations
4. Never becomes fatigue
v. When a student observes an animal tissue under the microscope, he
observed the cells present on a basement membrane. The tissue is,
1. Epithelial tissue
3. Muscle tissue
2. Posseses connective tissue
4. Nervous tissue
vi' Which is correct about cardiac muscle fibres?
1. Non striated
3. Multinucleate
2. Posseses intercalated discs
4. Long, cylindrical cells
(2) State two differences between meristematic and permanent tissues.
(3) Name the tissue types given below
(a)
(b)
(c)
For free distribution
18
Living tissues
Biology
(4) State two structural differences between a cardiac muscle fibre and a
skeletal muscle fibre.
^5'& Name the animal tissues given below in diagrams.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Technical terms
Meristematic tissues
úNdcl mgl
¤›°øÇ¯®
Apical meristems
w.%ia: úNdcl
Ea]¨ ¤›°øÇ¯®
Lateral meristems
md¾Yaúl úNdcl
Cøh¨ ¦S¢u ¤›°øÇ¯®
Intercalary meristems
wka;ria: úNdcl
£UP¨ ¤›°øÇ¯®
Parenchyma tissue
uDÿia;r mglh
¦øhU P»ÂøÇ¯®
Collenchyma tissue
ia:Q,fldaKdia;r mgl JmkU P»ÂøÇ¯®
Sclerenchyma tissue
oDVia;r mglh
ÁÀ»¸SU P»ÂøÇ¯®
Xylem tissue
Phloem tissue
Fibres
Sclereids
Animal tissues
Epithelial tissues
Muscle tissues
ffY,u mglh
maf,dahu mglh
;ka;=
Wm,
i;a;aj mgl
wmsÉPo mgl
fmaYs mgl
Connective tissues
iïnkaOl mgl
Nervous tissues
iakdhq mgl
PõÌ
E›¯®
|õºPÒ
ÁÀ¾¸UPÒ
Â»[QøÇ¯®
Â»[QøÇ¯®
uø\°øÇ¯®
öuõk¨¤øÇ¯®
|µ®¤øÇ¯®
19
For free distribution
Biology
Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis
Biology
02
Food is essential for the survival of all organisms. Food is obtained by many
ways. Using the knowledge about modes of nutrition of living beings, try to do the
assignment 2.1.
Assignment - 2.1
²
²
Identify the organisms in the
picture
State their modes of nutrition
Figure. 2.1
As you know the food of cow and stork, you can state easily how the cow and the
stork obtain their food. They depend on other organisms for their food. It is known
as heterotrophic mode of nutrition.
How do green plants obtain their nutrition? These plants produce their food within
them. Therefore, it is called autotrophic mode of nutrition. Living organisms depend
on that food directly or indirectly for their existence.
Figure 2.2 shows a diagramatic representation of the process of photosynthesis. Try
to understand the phenomenon of photosynthesis by studying it.
For free distribution
20
Photosynthesis
Biology
Lig ht e n erg y
H2O
Absorbed by
root hairs
O2
Glucose
Chloroplast
Absorb light
energy and
synthesise
glucose
CO2
Enters through
stomata
Figure. 2.2 - Factors necessary for photosynthesis and its products
Utilizing the light energy the cells containing chlorophyll in green plants
synthesize food using carbondioxide and water as raw materials. This process
is called photosynthesis.
2.1 Factors that affect photosynthesis
Let us study how green plants obtain water and carbondioxide for photosynthesis.
Terrestrial plants obtain water from soil for photosynthesis. Water in the soil is
absorbed through root hairs by osmosis. The absorbed water then travels into
root xylem through cortex and endodermis. From there water is transported into
mesophyll cells of leaves via the xylem of stem and the veins of leaves. The network
of veins in the leaves distributes water throughout the leaf.
CO2 is obtained from the atmosphere for photosynthesis. CO2 diffuses into leaf
through stomata. Then it reaches the mesophyll cells via inter cellular spaces.
2'3 rEmh - yß;,jhla bf,lafg%dak
Figure. 2.3 - Electron microscopic
wKaùlaIfhka fmfkk wdldrh
view of a chloroplast
The special green pigment called chlorophyll
found in the chloroplasts in plant cells, absorb
energy from sunlight.
Accordingly, the factors that affect photosynthesis
are,
² Chlorophyll
² Light energy
² Water
² Carbon dioxide
21
For free distribution
Biology
Activity - 2.1
Photosynthesis
Materials required :- Hydrilla or vallisneria leaves, A glass slide, A microscope
Method :-
² Observe a small section of a Hydrilla or Vallisneria plant leaf under the
microscope.
² Observe the way that chloroplast with chlorophyll move towards the direction
of sunlight for photosynthesis.
2.2 Products of photosynthesis
The glucose (C6 H12O6 ) produced during photosynthesis will be temporarily stored
in leaves as starch. Later, part of that starch is converted into sucrose (C12H22O11)
and transport into other tissues, via phloem. The sucrose that is transported to
storing organs are again stored as starch.
E.g :-- Fruits, Vegetables, Yams, Leaves, Roots
The byproduct of photosynthesis is O2 and it is diffused into the atmosphere through
stomata.
Assignment - 2.2
Prepare a report on adaptations shown by plants to absorb light energy from
sunlight efficiently for photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis can be expressed by a word equation as given below.
Carbon dioxide ¬ Water
Light energy
Chlorophyll
Glucose ¬ Oxygen
The balanced chemical equation for photosynthesis is,
Light energy
6CO2
(g)
+ 6H2O (l)
Chlorophyll
C6H12O6
(s)
+ 6O2
(g)
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
Plants absorb red and blue light of sunlight during photosynthesis.
Glucose produced during photosynthesis is stored temporarily in leaves as starch.
Therefore it could be tested whether the photosynthesis has taken place or not by
doing a test for starch.
For free distribution
22
Photosynthesis
Biology
Carry out the activity 2.2 to identify starch produced during photosynthesis.
Activity - 2.2
Materials required :- Beaker, Test tube, Tripod, Bunsen burner, Water,
Alcohol, Plant leaf
Method :-- •
Pluck a leaf from a plant which was in sunlight and boil it in
water.
•
Place that leaf in the boiling tube with alcohol and boil the tube
in a water bath for few minutes.
• Next wash the leaf and put few drops of iodine solution onto it
and observe the colour change.
Water
Leaf
Water bath
Alcohol
Leaf boiled
in water
Figure. 2.4
As chlorophyll dissolve in alcohol, the leaf is boiled in an alcohol solution. Then
the solution becomes green in colour and leaf turns to pale colour. As alcohol is
highly inflammable, it is boiled in a water bath.
If the leaf turns to blue or dark purple, once iodine is added, we can conclude that
starch is present in the leaf.
Testing of factors required for photosynthesis
The plant should be kept in dark for 48 hours before the experiment to show that
light energy and carbon dioxide is needed for photosynthesis. When the plant is in
the dark the stored starch completely removes from the leaves.
23
For free distribution
Biology
Photosynthesis
We will conduct the activity 2.3 to show that light energy is required for
photosynthesis.
Activity - 2.3
Experiment to show that light energy is required for photosynthesis
Black
polythene
A
colourless
polythene
B
Materials required :- Potted plant kept in
dark for 48 hrs, materials needed for starch
test, black and colourless polythene strips
Figure. 2.5
Method :-
● Select two leaves almost similar to
each other (A and B leaves) of the
plant kept in dark for 48hrs
● Cover a part of leaf A with black
polythene and part of leaf B with
colourless polythene
● Keep it under sunlight for 3-5 hours
● Prepare the leaves for starch test as in
activity 2.2
There is no colour change in the covered area of the leaf A but the covered area of
leaf B turns to purple or blue.
A
B
No colour change
Figure. 2.6
Dark Purple or
Blue colour
The covered area of leaf A has not received light energy. Therefore photosynthesis
has not taken place. Hence, there was no colour change with iodine solution. The
covered area of leaf B with colourless polythene has received light energy. Therefore
photosynthesis has taken place and showed a colour change to dark purple or blue
indicating starch has been produced.
Accordingly, we can conclude that light energy is necessary for photosynthesis.
For free distribution
24
Photosynthesis
Biology
Let's conduct the activity 2.4 to show that CO2 is required for photosynthesis.
Activity - 2.4
Experiment to show CO2 is required for photosynthesis
C
Water
Figure. 2.7
Materials required :- Potted plant, materials
required for starch test, two
polythene bags of same size,
KOH solution, water
D
Method:-
KOH
solution
●
Select two similar leaves of the above
plant. C and D
● Add potassium hydroxide (KOH) and
water to transparent polythene bags
separately. Then insert leaf D into
the polythene bag with KOH and leaf
C into the bag with water and make
them air tight.
● Place the plant in sunlight for 3-5 hrs.
● Then detach leaves C and D and carry out starch test separately
You can observe that there is no colour change in leaf D and there is a colour
change in leaf C after adding iodine solution.
D
C
No colour change
Dark Purple or Blue colour
Figure. 2.8
KOH present in bag D absorbs CO2. Therefore leaf D does not do photosynthesis
as it does not receive CO2. Therefore there is no colour change.
Leaf C receives CO2, so it photosynthesises. Therefore a colour change can be
observed. Leaf D has not produced starch but leaf C has produced starch.
Accordingly it can be concluded that CO2 is necessary for photosynthesis.
25
For free distribution
Biology
Photosynthesis
Let's do the activity 2.5 to show that chlorophyll is required for photosynthesis.
Activity - 2.5
Experiment to show chlorophyll is required for photosynthesis
Materials required :- Mosaic plant leaf (Hibiscus/ Croton), white paper,
materials required for starch test
Method :-
Pluck a mosaic leaf. Draw a sketch of it with its
pattern. Carry out starch test for it.
There is no color change in the white regions but a colour change can be observed
in green colour regions.
Green
coloured areas
white
coloured
areas
Before starch test
After starch test
Figure. 2.9
white coloured areas
with no colour change
Green coloured areas with
dark purple or blue colour
The white colour regions lack chlorophyll, so photosynthesis has not taken place.
Therefore starch has not been produced. So it can be concluded that chlorophyll is
essential for photosynthesis.
An experiment cannot be designed in the laboratory to test the need of water for
photosynthesis, because without water, the plant in the control experiment will die.
Scientists have shown the need of water for photosynthesis using water with O8
isotope. The oxygen end product contains O8
isotope. It confirms that water is
needed for photosynthesis.
18
18
Let's conduct the experiment below (Activity 2.6) to show that O2 is produced as a
product of photosynthesis.
For free distribution
26
Photosynthesis
Activity - 2.6
Biology
Experiment to show O2 is produced during photosynthesis
Materials required :- Trough, boiling tube, glass funnel, aquatic plant
(Hydrilla, Vallisneria), water
Method :- Add water into the trough. Then place Hydrilla or Vallisneria
inside the funnel. Fill a boiling tube inside water trough and
place it inverted on the funnel as in the diagram. Place the setup
in sunlight.
Light energy
Collected gas
Water
Trough
Figure. 2.10
Aquatic
plant
Gas bubbles release from the aquatic plant and that gas gets collected at the top of
the boiling tube. After the accumulation of gas about 3/4 th of its volume, the tube
will be taken out and a glowing splinter is inserted to test whether the gas is oxygen.
The splinter will burn with a bright flame. So we can conclude that the gas given
out in photosynthesis is oxygen.
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
Lavoisier is the first scientist who showed that oxygen diffuse from green
plants in the presence of sunlight.
27
For free distribution
Biology
Photosynthesis
2.3 Importance of photosynthesis
² Light energy is converted to chemical energy during photosynthesis. Plants
produce food and all organisms live on earth depend directly or indirectly on
that food. Photosynthesis cannot be done artificially. Therefore this process
carried out by green plants is essential for the maintenance of life on earth
² The oxygen gas which is required for the survival of aerobic organisms and
combustion of materials is released mainly by photosynthesis
² Carbondioxide that is accumulated due to respiration and combustion is
removed from the environment by photosynthesis. Thereby it helps to
maintain O2 and CO2 balance in the atmosphere
² Photosynthesis helps to maintain the carbon cycle
Summary
² Light energy is converted into chemical energy by green plants during
photosynthesis.
² Light energy, water, CO2 and chlorophyll are required for photosynthesis.
² The main product of photosynthesis is glucose and oxygen is produced as
a byproduct.
² Photosynthesis can be expressed by a balanced equation as below.
6CO2
(g)
+ 6H2O (l) C6H12O6
(s)
Light energy
Chlorophyll
+ 6O2
(g)
² The global importance of photosynthesis is provision of food to all
organisms directly or indirectly, Maintenance of O2 : CO2 balance in the
atmosphere and maintaining the carbon cycle.
For free distribution
28
Photosynthesis
Biology
Exercise
1. Underline the correct answer.
i. What is the main product of photosynthesis?
2. Starch
1. Glucose
3. Sucrose
4. Oxygen
ii. What is the tissue involved in transporting products in photosynthesis
to storing organs?
1. Xylem
2. Phloem
3. Parenchyma 4. Collenchyma
iii. What is the food type that translocates to storing organs?
4. Cellulose
2. Glucose
1. Sucrose
3. Starch
iv. What is the gas emitted during photosynthesis?
1. Carbondioxide
2. Nitrogen
3. Oxygen
4. Carbonmonoxide
v.
Into which energy that solar energy is converted to, during
photosynthesis?
1. Heat energy
2. Light energy
3. Chemical energy
4. Potential energy
2. Put “” or “” for the given statements.
i. Colour change with the starch test can be seen in a leaf after keeping
it in dark for 48 hours. ( )
ii. Leaf should be boiled in water to dissolve chlorophyll for the starch test . ( )
iii. Photosynthesis takes place in leaves only. ( )
iv. When leaves are boiled in water the permeability of them increases. ( )
v. Photosynthesis takes place only in green plants. ( )
3' "When grass is covered for three days with a black coloured polythene, it
becomes yellow in colour. Design an experiment to prove this phenomenon.
State observations and conclusions.
Photosynthesis
Chloroplasts
Chlorophyll
Aquatic plants
Technical terms
m%NdixYaf,aIKh
yß;,j
yß;m%o
c,rey Ydl
JÎzöuõS¨¦
£aø\¯Ä¸©o
£aø\¯®
}ºÁõÌ uõÁµ[PÒ
29
For free distribution
Mixtures
Chemistry
Chemistry
Mixtures
03
3.1 Types of mixtures
Let us pay our attention to the composition of the air around us. Air is composed
of gases like nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, water vapour, and very
small particles such as dust. So, you may understand that air is a mixture of several
substances.
Therefore, if some matter contains two or more substances, such matter is referred
to as mixtures. You have already learnt that elements and compounds are pure
substances. But, mixtures are not pure substances. Natural environment mostly
contains mixtures, not pure substances. Air, soil, sea water, river water and rocks
around us are examples. The things that we drink such as cool drinks, fruit drinks,
tea, coffee and food items such as ice cream, yoghurt and fruit salad are also
mixtures. Let us do the following activity to study more about the components of
a mixture.
Activity 3.1.1
Materials required: - Hydrated copper sulphate, naphthalene (moth balls), mortar
and pestle
Method: - Take some copper sulphate and naphthalene (moth balls) into a mortar,
grind them together with the pestle into a powder and mix well. Transfer the
powder onto a piece of paper and observe.
At a glance, you may not be able to see two substances, copper sulphate and
naphthalene but, you have a mixture of the two. A blend of two or more pure
substances is called a mixture and individual substances that form the mixture are
known as components.
Activity 3.1.2
Materials required :- Two beakers, a glass rod, a funnel, a filter paper, hand lens.
Method :- Transfer the mixture made in activity 3.1.1 above into a small 100 ml
beaker, add about 50 ml of water to it and stir well. Then, place a filter paper in a
glass funnel and filter this solution into another beaker. Allow the residue on the
filter paper to dry and observe with a hand lens. Observe the filtrate as well.
For free distribution
30
Mixtures
From this activity, you would have understood that the residue on the filter paper
is naphthalene powder. Since the solution is blue in colour, the substance that
dissolved in water is copper sulphate.
Chemistry
The above activity clarifies another feature of a mixture. That is, even when the
components are in a state of being mixed, their chemical nature remains unchanged.
In other words, the identity of the components constituting a mixture does not change
even in the mixture. Moreover, the above activity shows that the components in a
mixture can be separated by physical methods.
How the components in a mixture can be separated by physical methods will be
discussed under the sub unit 3.3.
Thus mixtures can be defined as follows: Mixtures are matter consisting of two
or more components which are not chemically combined, and can be separated
by physical methods.
Table 3.1.1 shows the components of some commonly known mixtures.
Mixture
Components
Table 3.1.1
Cement mortar
Sand, cement, water
Cake
Sugar, flour, water, colouring, butter
Well water
Sea water
Water, dissolved oxygen, dissolved carbondioxide
and various salts.
Water dissolved oxygen and salts such as sodium
chloride, magnesium chloride, magnesium sulphate,
calcium sulphate
When considering mixtures, it is very important that how well the components are
mixed. Understand this thoroughly with the help of the following examples.
Ex:- 1. When making colours by mixing paints, application of the paint will not
give a uniform colour unless they are mixed well.
2. If the components used to make cake are not mixed well, different parts of
the cake taste differently. Also, the rising will be different in different parts.
3. The medicinal property of tablets, capsules or liquid mixtures is not even in
all the parts if the components are not mixed well when producing medicines.
Investigate into more instances like the above examples.
Let us do activities 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 to study how the components are distributed in
a mixture.
31
For free distribution
Mixtures
Activity 3.1.3
Chemistry
Materials required :- A beaker, clay, water, a piece of cloth
Method :-
(i) Take about 500 ml of water into a beaker. Add about
10g of clayey soil to it, stir well and allow to stand still for
about one minute. Then filter the muddy coloured water
into another beaker using a piece of cloth. Allow to stand
still for about an hour and see whether the muddy colour
is uniformly distributed throughout the solution. See if the
clearness of the solution is similar from top to bottom.
Water containing
clay
Figure 3.1.1
metal plate
A
B
Figure 3.1.2
A
B
(ii) Take a piece of a metal sheet with a lustrous
surface. As shown in figure 3.1.2, take two
identical drops of the solution from two
places A and B with a pipette or glass rod,
place them on the spots marked as A and B
respectively, on the piece of metal and let
them vaporize. Check to see which water
sample contains more residual matter. See,
water obtained from which place contains
more residual matter.
The above activity leads to the following conclusions. In the mixture formed by
dissolving clay in water,
² The colour/transparency is different from place to place.
² The amount of clay particles in a unit volume is different from place to place.
Activity 3.1.4
Materials required :- A beaker, water, common salt, a piece of cloth
Method :- Take about 250 ml of water into a beaker. Add about 10 g of pure salt
into it, stir till the salt dissolves and filter the solution with a piece of cloth. Allow
to stand still for about one hour and see whether the clearness of the solution is
equal from top to bottom. Repeat what you did in activity 3.1.2 for this solution
as well.
For free distribution
32
Mixtures
Chemistry
Following conclusions can be drawn from the above activity. In the mixture formed
by dissolving salt in water,
² The transparency is equal throughout the solution.
² The amount of salt particles in a unit volume of the solution is equal throughout
the solution.
Pay your attention again to the mixtures you studied in activities 3.1.3 and 3.1.4.
According to the nature of the distribution of components, mixtures can be divided
into two categories.
² Mixtures in which the composition of the components is uniform throughout
the mixture.
Ex: mixture prepared by dissolving common salt in water.
² Mixtures in which the composition of the components is not uniform throughout
the mixture.
Ex: mixture prepared by dissolving clay in water
The mixtures in which the components are separated from one another are called
heterogeneous mixtures. The mixtures whose composition of the components are
uniformly distributed throughout are known as homogenous mixtures.
Homogeneous mixtures
The mixtures in which the components cannot be observed separately from one
another and the properties and composition are similar throughout are termed
homogenous mixtures. In a homogeneous mixture, the physical properties such as
colour, transparency and density are identical everywhere. Homogenous mixtures
are also known as solutions.
Examples: salt solution, sugar solution
Heterogeneous mixtures
The mixtures in which the components can be distinguished from one another and
they are known as heterogeneous mixtures. The physical properties of the mixture
such as colour, transparency and density are different from place to place, in a
heterogeneous solution.
Examples: Water in which clay is dissolved, water in which laundry blue
(the powder used for whitening of clothes) is dissolved, cement mortar, sherbet
drinks, fruit salad.
33
For free distribution
Mixtures
Activity 3.1.5
Chemistry
Dissolve the following substances in water and record the observations.
Common salt, washing powder, laundry blue (added to clothes), copper sulphate,
potassium permanganate, wheat flour, ethyl alcohol
Classify the various mixtures you prepared as homogeneous and heterogeneous
Heterogeneous and homogeneous mixtures can be classified further depending on
the physical state of the components. Study and understand the facts given in table
3.1.2 describing mixtures of two components.
First component
Table 3.1.2
Second component Nature of the
Wheat flour(Solid)
water(liquid)
mixture
heterogeneous
Salt (solid)
Water (liquid)
homogeneous
coconut oil (liquid) Water (liquid)
heterogeneous
Ethyl alcohol (liquid) Water (liquid)
homogeneous
Sugar (solid)
Salt (solid)
heterogeneous
Copper (solid)
Zinc (solid)
homogeneous
Carbon dioxide (gas) Hot water (liquid)
heterogeneous
Carbon dioxide (gas) Cold water (liquid) homogeneous
How the mixture
is termed
solid-liquid
heterogeneous
solid-liquid
homogeneous
liquid-liquid
heterogeneous
liquid-liquid
homogeneous
solid-solid
heterogeneous
solid-solid
homogeneous
*
gas-liquid
heterogeneous
gas-liquid
homogeneous
* Brass is an alloy composed of 65% of copper and 35% of zinc. This is a
solid-solid homogeneous mixture.
For free distribution
34
Mixtures
Assignment 3.1.1
Chemistry
Prepare a list of mixtures used in various occasions in the laboratory and day-
to-day life. State the components in those mixtures. Differentiate them as
homogeneous and heterogeneous. Indicate how those mixtures can be named
according to the state in which the components exist.
Solute and solvent of a solution
It was mentioned that a homogenous mixture is also called a solution. A solution
is composed of a solvent and one or more solutes. Of the components mixed to
form the solution, the component present in excess is the solvent. The rest of the
components are solutes.
Hence, it can be represented as,
Solute + Solvent = Solution
This can be further understood by paying attention to the solutions used in
day-to-day life.
Ex: Salt + Water = Salt solution
Copper sulphate + Water = Copper sulphate solution
Sugar + Water = Sugar solution
² Solubility of a solute
What will happen if a small amount of a given solute is added to a solvent? It will
dissolve and disappear.
What quantity of a solute can be dissolved like this in a given volume of the solvent?
Do the following activity to find it out.
Activity 3.1.6
Materials required :- A beaker, salt, a glass rod
Method :- Measure 100 ml of water into a clean beaker. Weigh 100 g of pure
salt (NaCl). Add salt, little at a time into the beaker of water and stir with the
glass rod to dissolve it. Do not add more salt until the salt added before dissolves
completely. When no more salt dissolves, stop adding more salt and weigh the
remaining amount of salt. Approximately, what is the maximum mass of salt that
can be dissolved in 100 ml of water?
35
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
Is the amount of other components that dissolve in the same volume of water, the
same? To investigate this, conduct the following activity.
Activity 3.1.7
Materials required :- A beaker, calcium hydroxide, a glass rod
Method :- Weigh 10 g of calcium hydroxide at the laboratory. Take 100 ml of
water to a beaker and dissolve calcium hydroxide in it, by adding a very small
amount at a time while stirring. Stop the addition of solid when no more calcium
hydroxide dissolves in the solution and weigh the remaining solid. Approximately
what is the maximum mass of calcium hydroxide that can be dissolved in 100 ml
of water?
Compare the results of the activity 3.1.7 with those of 3.1.6
The above activities show that the quantity dissolved is more for some substances,
while it is less for some other substances in the same volume of water.
Repeat activities 3.1.6 and 3.1.7 using 100 ml of hot water of about 80 0C instead of
water at room temperature. See whether the dissolved mass of the solute changes.
It would be observed that a greater amount of the solute dissolves at a higher
temperature than it does in an equal volume of water at room temperature.
In order to compare the dissolution of various solutes in a given solvent, the amount
of solutes dissolved in the same volume of the same solvent at the same temperature
should be compared. Therefore solubility is defined as follows.
The solubility of a solute at a given temperature can be defined as the mass
of that solute which dissolves in 100 g of the solvent at a certain temperature.
Ex:- at 25 0C, the solubility of magnesium chloride in water is 53.0 g.
At the same temperature, solubility of potassium sulphate in water is 12.0 g.
Factors affecting solubility
You have already identified temperature as a factor affecting the solubility of a
solute in a given solvent. Try the following activities to investigate the other factors
affecting solubility.
For free distribution
36
Mixtures
Activity 3.1.8
Chemistry
Materials required :- Two small beakers, common salt, sugar
Method :- Take 50 ml of water at the same temperature into each of two small
beakers. Accurately weigh 50 g each of salt and sugar. Adding a little at a time,
dissolve salt in one beaker and sugar in the other. When it comes to the point
beyond which no more solid dissolves, stop adding the substance and weigh the
remaining solid. See whether the amounts left are equal.
You will be able to see that at the same temperature, different solutes dissolve in
different amounts in equal volumes of the same solvent. Hence, it can be said that
the nature of the solute affects the solubility.
Activity 3.1.9
Materials required :- Two small beakers, kerosene, sugar
Method :- Take 50 ml each of the solvents water and kerosene at the same
temperature into two small beakers. Add 5 g of sugar into each of them and stir. In
which solvent does sugar dissolve?
You will be able to see that the sugar completely dissolves in water but sugar added
to kerosene remains almost undissolved.
This shows that the solubility of the same solute is different in equal volumes of
different solvents at the same temperature.
Therefore, it can be said that the nature of the solvent affects solubility.
According to the observations of the above activities, it is confirmed that the
following factors affect solubility.
1. Temperature
2. Nature of the solute
3. Nature of the solvent
Of the above factors, except temperature, the nature of the solute or the solvent
are properties of matter. The characteristic properties of matter are imparted by the
particles that make the matter. The nature of molecules which constitute the solute
and solvent is a factor that determines the solubility. In grade 10, you have learnt
about the polarity of a chemical bond. Based on the polarity chemical compounds
can be classified into two categories; polar and non polar. At the same time, chemical
compounds can also be classified into two types organic and inorganic - according
to the constituent elements of the compound.
Hence, solutes and solvents can be classified under four classes.
37
For free distribution
Mixtures
1. Polar organic solutes/solvents
2. Non - polar organic solutes/ solvents
3. Polar inorganic solutes/solvents
4. Non - polar inorganic solutes/solvents
Chemistry
From the following schematic diagram, you can identify the examples relevant to
those four classes.
Solutes / Solvents
Organic
Inorganic
Polar
Non-polar
² Alcohol
² Formalin
² Acetone
² Hexane
² Benzene
² Carbon
tetrachloride
Polar
² Water
² Ammonia
² Hydrogen
chloride
Non-polar
² Carbon disulphide
²
liquid
Carbon dioxide
Based on the above classification, a general concept on solubility such as the one
below can be composed.
Polar solutes are soluble in polar solvents
Ex 1 :- Ethanol is a polar compound. Water is a polar compound. Therefore,
ethanol is soluble in water.
Ex 2 :- Ammonia is a polar compound. Water is a polar compound. Therefore,
ammonia dissolves in water.
Non-Polar solutes are soluble in non-Polar solvents
Ex 1:- Grease is a non-polar solute. Kerosene is a non-polar solvent. Therefore,
grease dissolves in kerosene.
Ex 2:- Jak glue (koholle) is a non-polar solute. Kerosene is a non-polar solvent.
Therefore, jak glue is soluble in kerosene.
On that account, it can be concluded that solutes and solvents of similar
polarity properties dissolve in each other (like dissolves like).
For free distribution
38
Mixtures
² Solubility of a gas
Do gases really dissolve in water? Recall the following experiences to answer this.
² As soon as a bottle of soda water or a fizzy drink is opened, gas bubbles evolve
Chemistry
from the solution.
² When a beaker of water is heated, gas bubbles can be seen on the walls of the
beaker.
In both of these instances, it is the gases that were dissolved in water that got
liberated. During the production of soda water, carbon dioxide gas is mixed with
water under the special conditions of high pressure using machinery. Because of
this more gas dissolves in water. However, atmospheric gases are always in contact
with natural water. Then gases like carbon dioxide and oxygen dissolve only in
small quantities.
When water is heated, the dissolved gases are evolved. Therefore, the amount of
gases remaining dissolved in hot water is very small. Accordingly, temperature can
be taken as a factor affecting the solubility of a gas.
Generally, the solubility of a solid substance in a solvent can be increased by
increasing the temperature. But the solubility of a gas in a given solvent decreases
with the rise in temperature. Are there any more factors affecting the solubility of
a gas in water? See what conclusion could be drawn from the observations of the
following activity.
Activity 3.1.10
Materials required :- An unopened bottle of soda water (plastic), an empty
bottle of the same type.
Figure 3.1.3
Method :- Take an un opened bottle of soda water available in the market. To an
identical empty bottle, add water equal in quantity to that of soda water and close
the cap tightly. Now squeeze both bottles with hand and select the harder bottle.
39
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
You may feel that the unopened soda bottle is very hard that it cannot be pressed.
Think why it is so. In the bottle of soda above the liquid, there is carbon dioxide gas
under high pressure. The moment the cap is opened, carbon dioxide gas escapes,
and the rigidity of the bottle is lost. When the pressure of a gas in contact with water
is increased, the solubility of that gas in water too increases. Thus, the solubility of
a gas in water depends on two factors.
1. Temperature
2. Pressure
Pressurised CO2 gas
Figure 3.1.4
3.2 Composition of a mixture
Activity 3.2.1
Materials required :- Two beakers, potassium permanganate
Method :- Add 50 ml of water in each of to two beakers. Add 0.2 g and 0.4 g
potassium permanganate separately to the two beakers and stir well with a glass
rod. Record your observations.
You will be able to see, that the solution in the beaker with 0.2 g potassium
permanganate is light purple in colour whereas the purple colour of the solution
with 0.4 g potassium permanganate is relatively more intense.
When preparing the above two solutions, the volumes of water taken into the two
beakers were equal. That means, the volumes of the solvent were equal. However,
the masses of potassium permanganate used as the solute were different. In the
solution with a more intense purple colour, a unit volume contains more solute
particles. Therefore, the composition of these two solutions is different.
When preparing mixtures of weedicides and insecticides, they must be prepared
in correct composition. Prescribed composition should be used when preparing
solutions using pharmaceuticals. Laboratory work often involve the preparation of
solutions of fixed composition. Therefore, understanding about the composition of
mixtures is very important in everyday life as well as in laboratory experiments.
There are several ways to express the composition of a mixture. Some of those are
discussed in the following sections.
For free distribution
40
Mixtures
Chemistry
3.2.1 Composition of a mixture as a mass fraction (m/m)
Let us consider a mixture comprising of two components A and B. The mass fraction
of A in that mixture can be expressed as follows.
Mass fraction of A in the mixture
=
Mass of A
Mass of A + Mass of B
Hence, the mass fraction of a given component of a mixture is the ratio of the mass
of that component to the total mass of the mixture.
Worked examples :-
1) 100 g of the solution contains 5 g of a solute. Give the composition of the solute
of this mixture as a mass fraction.
Mass fraction of the solute = Mass of the solute
Mass of the solution
=
5 g
100 g
=
1
20
= 0.05
2) When 250 g of a salt (NaCl) solution was weighed accurately and all the water
in it was evaporated, 10 g of salt was left. Indicate the composition of salt in the
solution as a mass fraction.
Mass fraction of salt
=
10 g
250 g
1
=
25
= 0.04
41
For free distribution
Mixtures
3.2.2 Composition of a mixture as a volume fraction (V/V)
Volume fraction is used to indicate the composition of a mixture when both of its
components exist either in the liquid state or in the gaseous state.
Chemistry
In a mixture containing two components A and B, the volume fraction of A can be
given as follows.
Volume fraction of A =
Total volume of the mixture of A and B
Volume of A
Accordingly, the volume fraction of a given component of a mixture is the ratio of
the volume of that component to the total volume of the mixture.
Worked examples:-
1) A solution of final volume 250 cm3 was made by adding distilled water to
25 cm3 of ethyl alcohol (C2H5OH). What is the volume fraction of ethyl alcohol in
this solution?
Volume fraction of ethyl alcohol
= Volume of ethyl alcohol
Total volume of the solution
= 25 cm3
250 cm3
= 1/10
= 0.1
2) How do you prepare 500 cm3 of an aqueous solution of acetic acid of composition
1/25 (V/V) ?
Volume fraction of acetic acid = Volume of acetic acid
Final volume of the solution
Volume of acetic acid
= Volume fraction of acetic acid x Final volume
of the solution
=
1
25
x 500 cm3
=
20 cm3
For free distribution
42
Mixtures
Therefore, an acetic acid solution with the composition of 1/25 (V/V) is obtained
by measuring 20 cm3 of acetic acid accurately and adding water to make the final
volume up to 500 cm3.
Chemistry
3.2.3 The composition of a mixture as a mole fraction
The mole fraction of each component of a mixture containing only two component
A and B can be expressed as follows.
Mole fraction of A
= Amount of moles of A
Amount of moles of A + Amount of moles of B
Mole fraction of B
= Amount of moles of B
Amount of moles of A + Amount of moles of B
Thus, the mole fraction of a component of a mixture is, the ratio of the amount of
moles of that component to the total amount of moles of all the components in the
mixture.
Worked examples :-
1) What is the mole fraction of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in a solution made by
dissolving 40 g of sodium hydroxide in 180 g of water?
Molar mass of water
= (1 x 2 + 16) g mol -1
= 18 g mol-1
Amount of moles of water in the solution =
180 g
18 g mol-1
Molar mass of sodium hydroxide
Amount of moles of sodium hydroxide
in the solution
= 10 mol
= (23+16+1) g mol-1
= 40 g mol-1
40 g
=
40 g mol-1
= 1 mol
43
For free distribution
Mixtures
Mole fraction of sodium
hydroxide in the solution =
Chemistry
Amount of moles of sodium hydroxide
Amount of moles of water + Amount of moles of
sodium hydroxide
=
1
10 + 1
=
1
11
Similarly, the mole fraction of water in the above solution can be calculated.
Mole fraction of water =
Amount of moles of water
Amount of moles
+
Amount of moles of
of water
sodium hydroxide
=
10
10 + 1
=
10
11
Sum of mole fractions = Mole fraction of water + Mole fraction of sodium
hydroxide
=
10
11
+
1
11
11
11
=
= 1
The sum of mole fractions of all the components in a mixture is one. The sum
of mass fractions or volume fractions of all the components in a mixture is
equal to one. There are no units for the mass fractions, volume fractions or
mole fractions of a mixture.
The composition of a mixture expressed as a fraction can also be expressed as a
percentage or as parts per million (ppm).
Composition as a percentage
Composition as parts per million (ppm)
=
=
Fraction x 100
fraction x 1 000 000
For free distribution
44
Mixtures
Worked examples:
Chemistry
1) 20 g of dolomite contains 12 g of magnesium carbonate. Calculate the mass
fraction of magnesium carbonate and express it as a mass percentage.
Mass fraction of magnesium carbonate =
12 g
20 g = 0.6
Magnesium carbonate composition as a percentage = 0.6 x 100 = 60%
3.2.4 Expressing composition of a mixture in terms of mass/ volume (m/v)
This expresses the mass of solute contained in a unit volume of a mixture.
1 dm3 of Jeewani solution contains 5 g of sodium chloride. Find the composition of
sodium chloride in it, in terms of m/v
Composition of solute (m/v) = Mass of sodium chloride
Volume of solution
= 5 g
1dm3
= 5 g dm-3
3.2.5 Expressing composition of a mixture in terms of amount of
moles / volume (n/v)
This is used to express the composition of a homogeneous mixture (solution). 'Mole'
is the international unit for the amount of matter. Here, the composition is given in
terms of the amount of moles of solute contained in unit volume of a solution. The
composition expressed in this way is called the concentration (C). In chemistry,
very often concentration of a solution is expressed in terms of the amount of moles
of solute contained in a cubic decimetre of the solution.
Worked examples :-
1) 2 dm3 of a solution contains 4 moles of sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Find the
sodium hydroxide concentration of this solution.
Amount of moles of sodium hydroxide in 2 dm3 of the solution = 4 mol
Amount of moles of sodium hydroxide in 1 dm3 of the solution =
4 mol x 1 dm3
2 dm3
= 2 mol
45
For free distribution
Mixtures
Chemistry
Concentration of sodium hydroxide in the solution = 2 m ol
1 dm 3
= 2 mol dm-3
2) (i) What is the mass of glucose (C6H12O6) required to prepare 1 dm3 of a 1 mol dm -3
glucose solution? (C =12, H = 1, O = 16 )
For this, 1 mol of glucose is required
Molar mass of glucose
= (12x6 + 1x12 + 16x6) g mol-1
= 180 g mol-1
Mass of glucose required
= 180 g mol-1 x 1 mol
= 180 g
(ii) Work out the mass of glucose that should be weighed to prepare 500 cm3 of a
1 mol dm-3 glucose solution.
Mass of glucose required to prepare
1000 cm3 of the solution
= 180 g
Mass of glucose required to prepare =
500 cm3 of the solution
180 g x 500 cm3
1000 cm3
= 180 g/ 2
= 90 g
Preparation of standard solutions
During chemical experiments, standard solutions are required to be prepared.
A standard solution is a solution in which the concentration is very accurately
known. The relationships among the following units are very important in the
preparation of standard solutions.
1dm3 = 1 l (Litre)
1dm3 = 1000 cm3
1dm3 = 1000 ml
1cm3 = 1 ml
The following laboratory equipment are required to prepare a solution of a specified
concentration.
For free distribution
46
Mixtures
Chemistry
Volumetric flasks corresponding to the
Wash bottle
volume of the solution
Watch glass
Figure 3.2.1 - Laboratory equipment required to prepare a solution.
Funnel
Let us study how 500 cm3 of a 1 mol dm-3 sodium chloride solution is prepared.
First, the mass of sodium chloride required for this should be calculated.
Molar mass of sodium chloride
= (23.0 + 35.5) g mol -1
Mass of sodium chloride in 1000 cm3 of a
1 mol dm-3 solution
= 58.5 g
= 58.5 g mol-1
Mass of sodium chloride in 500 cm3 of a
=
l mol dm-3 solution
58.5 g
1000 cm3
x 500 cm3
= 29.25 g
47
For free distribution
Mixtures
Chemistry
² Next, weigh 29.25 g of sodium
chloride very accurately onto a watch
glass using a four beam balance/
chemical balance. (Get instructions
from the teacher as to how weighing
is done accurately using the balance).
² Select a clean 500 cm3 volumetric
flask.
² Remove its stopper and place a clean
funnel as shown in the figure.
² Transfer the weighed sodium chloride
on the watch glass completely through
the funnel using the wash bottle. Wash
the surface of the watch glass and
the inner surface of the funnel and
transfer the washings into the flask.
² Add about 2/3 of the required volume
of water and stopper the volumetric
flask.
² Shake the flask so that all of the
sodium chloride dissolves well. ( Get
instructions from the teacher about how mixing should be done.)
Figure 3.2.2 - Preparation of a standard
solution
² After all the salt is dissolved well, add water carefully, keeping
the eye at the level of the volume mark of the flask. Stop
adding water when the meniscus is at the position of the mark,
as shown in the figure 3.2.3.
² Stopper the flask and mix again. (Get instructions from the
teacher regarding how mixing should be done)
For free distribution
48
Figure 3.2.3
Mixtures
When preparing a solution of a specific concentration, following factors should be
taken into consideration.
Chemistry
1.
Cleanliness of all the equipment used.
2. Weighing the solute accurately.
3. Washing well and transferring the substance sticking on to the watch glass and
the funnel into the flask.
Use the correct technique for mixing.
Adjusting the final volume carefully.
Prevention of the entry of impurities into the solution.
4.
5.
6.
Activity - 3.2.2
1. Divide the class into four groups and prepare the four solutions given below
using the correct method.
a) 250 cm3 of 1 mol dm-3 sodium chloride (NaCl)
b) 100 cm3 of 1 mol dm-3 glucose (C6H12O6)
c) 500 cm3 of 1 mol dm-3 urea (CO(NH2)2)
d) 250 cm3 of 1 mol dm-3 copper sulphate (CuSO4)
2. In the solutions you have prepared,
² name the solute and solvent
² indicate the amounts of the solvents and the solutions used with their units.
² indicate the name, concentration and the date of preparation.
3. Give examples for the instances of preparing solutions in everyday life.
Assignment 3.2.2
Make a list of instances in which solutions of very accurate composition should
be prepared.
Ex: Preparation of saline solutions
Thoroughly study the following worked examples in order to get a better
understanding of the composition of solutions.
49
For free distribution
Mixtures
Worked examples :-
1. A solution was prepared by weighing 17 g of sodium nitrate (NaNO3) very
accurately dissolving it in a 200 cm3 volumetric flask and diluting with water up
to a final volume of 200 cm3 . What is the concentration of this solution?
Chemistry
(Na = 23, N =14, O =16)
Molar mass of sodium nitrate
= {23+14+ (16x3)}g mol-1
Amount of moles of sodium nitrate in 17 g =
= 85 g mol-1
17 g
85 g mol-1
Final volume of the solution
= 0.2 mol
= 200 cm3
Amount of moles of sodium nitrate in 1 dm3 (1000 cm3) =
x 1000 cm3
0.2 mol
200 cm3
of the solution
Concentration of sodium nitrate in the solution =
1 mol
1 dm3
= 1
= 1 mol dm-3
2. What is the mass of potassium carbonate (K2CO3) required to prepare 500 cm3
of a 1 mol dm-3 potassium carbonate solution? (K = 39, C = 12, O = 16)
Molar mass of potassium carbonate
= {(39x2)+12+(16x3)}g mol-1
= 138 g mol-1
Mass of potassium carbonate in 1000 cm3 = 138g
of a 1 mol dm-3 solution
Mass of potassium carbonate in 500 cm3
of a 1 mol dm-3 solution
=
138 g
1000 cm3
x 500 cm3
Mass of potassium carbonate required
= 69 g
= 69 g
For free distribution
50
Chemistry
Mixtures
3. A solution of 1 dm3 is prepared by dissolving 12 g of urea {CO(NH2)2} in distilled
water. Find the concentration of this solution. (C = 12, O = 16, N = 14, H = 1)
Molar mass of urea
= {12 +16+(14 x 2) + (1 x 4) } g mol-1
Amount of moles of urea in 60 g
= 1 mol
= 60 g mol-1
Amount of moles of urea in 12 g
=
1mol
60 g
x 12 g
= 0.2 mol
Amount of moles of urea in 1 dm3
= 0.2 mol
Concentration of urea in the solution =
0.2 mol
1 dm3
4. To a 250 cm3 volumetric flask, 18 g, of glucose (C6H12O6) was transferred and
distilled water was added until the total volume of the solution was 250 cm3 .
What is the concentration of this solution?
= 0.2 mol dm-3
Molar mass of glucose
= {(12x6) + (1x12) + (16x6)} g mol-1
Amount of moles of glucose in 180 g
= 1 mol
= 180 g mol-1
Amount of moles of glucose in 18 g
1mol
180 g
=
x 18 g = 0.1 mol
Amount of moles of glucose in 250 cm3
= 0.1 mol
Amount of moles of glucose in 1000 cm3 = 0.1mol
250 cm3 x1000 cm3
= 0.4 mol
Concentration of the solution
=
0.4 mol
1 dm3
= 0.4 mol dm-3
51
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
The concentration of a solution can be lowered by adding more solvent to it.
Decreasing the concentration by adding more solvent is known as dilution. Most
of the acids in laboratory stores are concentrated acids. Mostly the acid solutions
prepared by diluting those concentrated acids are used for laboratory experiments.
For your attention
As a safety measure, when diluting concentrated solutions, always
the acid should be added to water. It is because the dilution of
concentrated acids is highly exothermic and may be dangerous.
When n moles of a solute are dissolved in a solution of volume V, its concentration
C can also be found using the following equation.
C =
n
V
When n is in moles (mol) and V is in cubic decimetres (dm-3), concentration C is
given in moles per cubic decimetre (mol dm-3)
Using the above equation, solve the previously studied worked examples to calculate
the concentration.
3.3 Separation of compounds in mixtures
Many substances essential for our daily affairs are available in the Earth's crust.
Metals, mineral oils, salts, sand, clay, coal, minerals and rocks are some of them.
These rarely exist in pure form in the Earth's crust. Naturally they occur mixed with
other substances. Therefore, the essential components should be separated from
those mixtures.
Some instances where components from mixtures should be separated, are given
below.
² Removal of stones and sand from rice
² Separation of salt from sea water
² Separation of various minerals from mineral sands
² Separation of various fuels by the mineral oil refinery
² Separation of sugar from sugar cane crushes
² Separation of gases such as oxygen, nitrogen and argon from atmospheric air
² Obtaining distilled water from common well water or river water
² Preparing potable water from sea water
For free distribution
52
Mixtures
Many more such occasions can be given as examples. In this chapter we study
about several methods of separating components in mixtures.
Chemistry
3.3.1 Mechanical separation
You know that rice is sifted to remove the sand mixed with it. In this, sand is removed
from rice based on the difference of the densities of the components. The separation
of components in a mixture using the difference of their physical properties such
as density, particle size, particle shape, magnetic properties and electric properties
is called mechanical separation. Study the examples given in table 3.3.1 and have a
further understanding about mechanical separations.
Mechanical
method
Table 3'3'1
Occasion of using
Winnowing
Removal of chaff from rice
Physical property
based
Difference in densities of
the components
Removal of gravel from sand Difference in the size of
Sieving
Sifting
Removal of sand from rice
Floating on water
Removal of dud seeds from
seed paddy
Directing into a
stream of water
Magnetic
seperation
Separating gold from ores
Separating certain minerals
from mineral sands
component particles
Difference in densities of
the components
Difference between the
densities of components
and water
Difference in densities of
the components
Magnetic property of the
components
The methods such as winnowing, sieving, sifting, floating and subjecting to
magnetism that separate components of a mixture are called mechanical methods.
Methods such as these are frequently used in day today life.
Assignment 3.3.1
Prepare a list of examples for the occasions where components are separated by
mechanical methods in day today life.
53
For free distribution
Mixtures
3.3.2 Vapourisation/Evaporation
You may have observed the extraction of salt from sea water. What happens here is
that the water evaporates due to solar heat. Water gets evaporated and the dissolved
salts get precipitated. During vapourization, the unnecessary components are
vaporized by supplying heat to a mixture and the essential component is
isolated.
Chemistry
When metals are dissolved in mercury a special solution known as an amalgam is
formed.
When impure gold is dissolved in mercury, a solution of pure gold is obtained.
This is known as the gold amalgam. When gold amalgam is heated, mercury is
evaporated and the pure gold is remained. The evaporated mercury is cooled and
used again.
3.3.3 Filtration
Have you seen adding coconut milk to some curries when they are cooked at home?
How is coconut milk made? Water is added to the coconut scraped by a coconut
scraper, and then crushed and squeezed by hand. Parts of the white liming remain
suspended in water without going into the solution. When the stuff is put into a
milk-strainer the milky solution filters off leaving the pieces of solid coconut in the
strainer.
Filtration can be used to separate from a mixture, the components that remain
suspended in a liquid without going into the solution. A filter is required to filter
a mixture. Milk-strainer is such a device. The filter paper used in laboratories is
another such filter. Water purifying plants have sand filters.
A filter has small holes. Particles smaller than the holes can pass through. But
particles larger than those holes cannot pass through them. This is the concept used
in filtration. In filtration, the substance left in the filter is called the residue while the
solution that gets filtered is known as the filtrate.
For free distribution
54
Mixtures
Activity 3.3.1
Chemistry
Materials required :- Dry soil, salt, filter papers, a funnel, a beaker, glass rod,
flask
glass rod
filter paper
funnel
residue
beaker
mixture of water, salt
and soil
flask
filtrate
Figure 3.3.1
Method :- Mix well, about 10 g of dry soil and about 5 g of salt (NaCl). Take
about 50 cm3 of water to a beaker, add the above mixture into it and stir. Arrange
the apparatus as shown in figure 3.3.1 and filter. After filtration is over, observe the
filter paper. Add about 10 cm3 of the filtrate to an evaporating dish and vaporize.
See whether there is anything left in the dish.
Large clay particles in the sample of soil do not pass through the filter, and they are
held back by the filter paper. Since water and salt are made up of smaller particles,
they pass through the filter and get into the filtrate.
3.3.4 Crystallisation
Let us consider instances where a solid dissolves in a solvent to form a homogeneous
mixture. At a certain temperature, there is a maximum concentration of a substance
that stays dissolved in a solution. Such solutions are said to be saturated with that
substance.
If this saturated solution is vaporized, the concentration of that substance in
the solution increases further. When the concentration of the solute exceeds the
maximum possible concentration in the solution, the solute separates out forming
crystals.
Crystallization is thus the method of separating solid substances by concentration
when a solute that can turn into a solid is present in a solution.
Manufacturing of sugar is an industry that utilities crystallization. Stems of
Sugarcane are crushed and squeezed and the juice is purified. Its concentration
is increased by vaporisation. Then, sugar separates out from the juicy solution as
crystals.
55
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
Production of salt from sea water is another industry that adopts crystallization.
During the production of salt in salterns, several salts that are dissolved in sea water
get crystallized.
Assignment 3.3.2
Obtain salt by the vaporisation or evaporation of a concentrated salt solution.
3.3.5 Recrystallization
Recrystallization is used to separate pure substances from solid, crystalline
substances carrying impurities. The process of dissolving a solid, crystalline
substance and turning it again into crystals is called recrystallization. Crystals of
high quality without impurities can be obtained by recrystallization.
In recrystallization, the impure solid is dissolved in the hot solvent till it becomes
saturated. Afterwards, to separate the impurities in the impure solid, above solution
is filtered while it is still hot. Pure crystals of the solid is obtained by cooling the
filtrate. Here, crystallization occurs because the cold solution is saturated with the
solute although the hot solution is not. The soluble components present as impurities
in minor quantities are not crystallized as the solution is not saturated in them.
Activity 3.3.2
Take about 50 g of common salt available in the market. Take about 50 cm3 of
water at a temperature of about 90 0c, into a beaker and dissolve crystals of salt
until the solution is saturated. Filter the solution while it is still hot, using filter
paper. Take the filtrate into a beaker, place it in a container of ice and shake
slowly. Observe the crystals formed.
3.3.6 Solvent extraction
You have learnt that the nature of both solute and solvent affect solubility. Some
solutes are soluble in large amounts in one solvent but dissolve in very small
quantities in another solvent. For example, when solid iodine is added to water, a
very small amount dissolves giving a light coloured solution. But a larger amount
of iodine dissolves in solvents like carbon tetrachloride and cyclohexane.
For free distribution
56
Mixtures
Chemistry
Aqueous solution of
iodine
Carbon tetrachloride
Figure 3.3.2
When carbon tetrachloride is added to an aqueous solution of iodine, they do not
mix, and the layers get separated. After some time, it can be seen that the carbon
tetrachloride layer turns violet while the aqueous layer becomes pale. What has
happened here is the extraction of iodine from the aqueous layer into the carbon
tetrachloride layer in which it is more soluble. The specialty here is the adequacy
of a small volume of carbon tetrachloride to extract the iodine from a large volume
of aqueous solution.
After this, iodine can be recovered by separating layers and evaporating carbon
tetrachloride.
Hence, solvent extraction is the method of drawing up a substance from a solvent in
which it is less soluble, into another solvent in which it is more soluble, where the
two solvents are immiscible and are in contact with each other.
The medicinal components in some plants are found only in trace amounts.
Medicinal solutions of higher concentration are prepared using solvent such as
ethanol. Solvents extraction is used in the production of medicinal extracts and
potions.
3.3.7 Simple distillation, fractional distillation and steam
distillation
The separation of components by boiling a solution or a mixture and condensing
the vapour is called distillation.
So, there must be a mechanism to cool the distillate or the vapour that evolves
when a given mixture is heated. The Liebig condenser in the school laboratory is an
57
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
apparatus designed for this. The vapour is allowed to pass through the condenser and
cold water is circulated around it, in order to cool down the vapour. This condenser
has an inlet and an outlet for water.
Water out
Vapour in
liquid out
Figure 3.3.3 - The Liebig condenser
water in
Activity 3.3.3
Collect a sample of distilled water using the Liebig condenser available in the
laboratory. Discuss with your science teacher the special facts that should be
taken into consideration when setting up this apparatus.
Assignment 3.3.3
Investigate into how an improvised liebig condenser can be made. Make such an
apparatus, show it to the science teacher and find its merits and demerits.
² Simple distillation
Simple distillation is used to separate components in a mixture which contains
a volatile component with other non-volatile components. Only the volatile
components are vaporized during distillation. The other components are left in the
solution. For example, let us assume that a sample of well water is subjected to
distillation.
In addition to water, it contains various salts and some gases dissolved in it. When
heated slightly, the gases escape without getting condensed. Boiling points of salts
are higher than that of water. Therefore, when the sample of well water is heated and
vaporized, only the water vaporizes. Salts can be seen deposited at the bottom of the
container. For this kind of distillation, special control of conditions is not essential.
Hence, this is known as simple distillation. For this use of simple equipment such
as the liebig condenser is adequate. The figure illustrates the apartments set up to
obtain distilled water from a sample of well water. Some countries use this method
to obtain potable water from sea water.
For free distribution
58
Mixtures
Chemistry
Thermometer
Water out
Liebig condenser
Well water
Water in
Distilled water
Figure 3.3.4 - Simple distillation
² Fractional distillation
If the solution or the mixture subjected to separation contains several volatile
components, simple distillation or the apparatus used in simple distillation cannot
be used to separate them. It has to be performed under controlled conditions and
for it, a fractionating column should be used. If two liquids are to be separated by
fractional distillation, there should be a considerable difference in their boiling
points. That means, their volatilities need to be considerably different. Here, the
vapour contains a higher percentage of the more volatile component and a lower
percentage of the less volatile component.
Let us assume that the boiling point of a component A mixture is 80 0C and the
boiling point of a component B is 40 0C. Upon heating, the mixture containing A
and B begins to boil at a temperature slightly above 40 0C. Therefore, the vapour
formed is richer in component B. When this vapour is collected and condensed at
a temperature closer to 40 0C, the resulting liquid contains more B. A is present
in smaller amount. When more of B gets removed from the mixture like this, its
percentage of A increases. Then, the temperature at which the mixture boils also
increases. This way, the components can be separated by collecting the vapours
at different temperatures and condensing them. Separation of several components
by distillation under controlled cooling conditions like this, is known as fractional
distillation.
59
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
Crude oil is a mixture of many hydrocarbon components. When refining crude oil,
a fractionating tower is used to control the cooling conditions. In this tower, the
temperature is appropriately controlled at different levels and the components are
separately withdrawn at the respective positions. Components with lower boiling
points are separated from the upper levels of the tower. Components with high
boiling points are (bitumen) deposited at the bottom of the tower. This can be
further understood by studying figure 3.3.5.
Petroleum gases (refinery gases)
(B.P.- 25 0C)
gasoline (petrol)
(B.P.- 40 - 75 0C)
naphtha
(B.P.- 75 - 150 0C)
kerosene
(B.P.- 150 - 240 0C)
diesel
(B.P.- 220 - 250 0C)
lubricating oil
(B.P.- 250 - 300 0C)
gas cylinders
chemicals
Petrol
Chemicals
Jet fuels
diesel
lubricants
inca oil
(B.P.- 250 0C
fuels for ships
bitumen (asphalt)
Surfacing roads
Figure 3.3.5 - Fractionating tower
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
Fractional distillation is also used to separate the components in atmospheric
air. When air is pressurised and cooled to about - 200 0C, it liquifies. This liquid
is also a mixture of several components which vaporize at their boiling points.
Likewise, nitrogen boils off at - 196 0C whereas oxygen and carbon dioxide boil
at - 183 0C and - 78.5 0C respectively.
For free distribution
60
Mixtures
² Steam distillation
We know that certain parts of plants contain volatile components. Cinnamon,
clove, cymbopogon, nutmeg and cardamom are few such examples. It is difficult
to increase the temperature uniformly up to the boiling point of these compounds.
Moreover, at the temperatures close to the boiling point, there is a possibility of
destruction of these compounds by decomposition or getting converted into other
compounds. Therefore, heat is supplied to the mixture by steam.
Chemistry
When water soluble compounds are mixed with water, the boiling point of such
mixtures are above the boiling point of water. On the other hand, when the
compounds that do not mix well with water are together with water, the boiling
point of the mixture drops below the boiling point of water.
Most of the essential oils are immiscible with water and their boiling points are
greater than that of water. They occur in living cells, mixed with water. Extraction
of essential oils can be demonstrated in the laboratory by using an apparatus such
as the one given below.
Water
Water out
Liebig condenser
Water
in
Water and oil
{
heating
heating
Cinnamon leaves
Figure 3.3.6 - Steam distillation
When heat is supplied to these mixtures by steam, both water and the essential oil
get liberated as a mixture of vapors at a temperature below the boiling point of
water (100 0C). When the distillate (vapour) is cooled it separates into two layers
because water and the essential oil are immiscible. Therefore, they can be easily
separated as pure substances.
61
For free distribution
Mixtures
Chemistry
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
Essential oils have many uses.
• Used as flavours and condiments in food
• Used to produce perfumes
• Used as ingredients in toothpaste
• Used to produce pharmaceuticals
Assignment 3.3.4
Prepare a list of plants used to produce essential oils in Sri Lanka. Find out which
parts of these plants contain more of those essential compounds.
3.3.8 Chromatography
Chromatography is used to separate and identify the components present in a mixture
(solid or liquid) containing non-volatile components. There are many different types
of chromatography. The method carried out using paper (cellulose) is known as
paper chromatography.
Add a little amount of water to a petri dish and dip one end of a dry strip of a filter paper
in it. It can be observed that a stream of water particles is soaked up the strip of paper
from bottom to top. Even when water is replaced by compounds such as acetone, ether
and ethyl alcohol, a flow of liquid which flows up from the bottom to top can be seen.
The strip of paper is called the stationary phase while the solvent that is soaked into
it is called the mobile phase. When a small portion of the mixture whose components
need to be separated is placed on this paper, the components in the mixture dissolve
in the solvent and move up with the solvent front. This upward movement depends on
the forces of attraction of the components of the mixture, to the stationary phase. For
example, if one component in the mixture is strongly attracted to the stationary phase
(the paper), its rate of upward movement decreases. If there is another component in
the mixture that is relatively less attracted to the mixture, it moves up faster through the
stationary phase. Because of this difference in the speed of movement of the components
in the mixture, they get separated from one another. Let us do the following activity to
separate out the components in a chlorophyll mixture using paper chromatography.
For free distribution
62
Mixtures
Activity 3.3.4
Chemistry
Materials required :- Chromatography papers or filter papers or A4 papers,
spinach leaves, mortar and pestle, a thin piece of silk cloth, a boiling tube, a
rubber stopper with a hook
Method :- Crush a few spinach leaves thoroughly using mortar and the pestle
available in the laboratory. Collect the chlorophyll extract onto a watch glass by
placing the crushed paste on a piece of thin silk cloth and squeezing it.
• Cut a strip of chromatography/filter/A4 paper
• Take a little bit of the chlorophyll extract to a capillary tube and place it on
the strip of the paper a little above the end of it as shown in the diagram. The
solvent vaporizes leaving chlorophyll on the paper. Place another drop on
same spot.
strip of paper
drop of chlorophyll
Figure 3.3.7
• Connect a piece of string to the end of the paper strip opposite to that with the
chlorophyll drop.
• Add a solvent such as acetone/kerosene/petrol to the boiling tube and stopper
it. Leave it to saturate. Connect a hook to the stopper as shown in the diagram
and suspend the strip on the hook so that its other end dips in the solvent.
Ensure that the sides of the strip do not touch the walls of the boiling tube.
hook
strip of paper
boiling tube
drop of chlorophyll
solvent
Figure 3.3.8
63
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
Leave it for some time and then take out the strip of paper and observe It can
be seen that the components of different colours are separated. This leads to the
conclusion that chlorophyll contains different components.
Therefore, chromatographic technique can be used to separate and identify several
components when they are mixed together. Chromatography is used to find whether
poisonous chemicals are mixed with water. It is also used to check whether harmful
substances are associated with food items. Chromatographic technique is also
useful in identifying active chemical compounds in plants.
Uses of separating techniques
Extraction of salt from sea water
In Sri Lanka salt is produced by the evaporation of sea water in salterns. The sea
water collected in the salt pans are concentrated by evaporation during which salt
crystallizes out finally. The separating techniques evaporation and crystallization
are used in this method.
The location and structure of a saltern is very important in the production of salt.
The geographical and environmental factors that should be taken into consideration
when setting up a saltern are as follows.
1. A flat land situated closer to a coastal area to obtain sea water easily
2. Presence of a clayey soil with minimum percolation of water
3. Prevailence of dry and hot climate with bright sunlight and wind throughout
the year
4. An area with minimum rainfall.
Regarding the structure of a saltern, three types of tanks can be identified.
²
²
²
Large, shallow tanks
Medium tanks
Small tanks
For free distribution
64
Figure 3.3.9 A saltern
Mixtures
The main steps of the production of salt in a saltern are as follows.
Step 1 :- The sea water is either made to flood into the big, shallow tanks during
high tide or is pumped into them and allowed to evaporate by sunlight.
When the concentration is twice as double the initial concentration
of sea water, calcium carbonate (CaCO3) begins to crystallize and
precipitate at the bottom of the first tank.
Chemistry
Step 2 :- This water is then transfered into the medium- sized tanks in which the
water evaporates further. When the concentration of water is about four
times the initial concentration, calcium sulphate (CaSO4) crystallizes
and settles down at the bottom.
Step 3 :- Following the precipitation of calcium sulphate, the solution is allowed
to flow from the medium tanks into the smaller tanks in which water
is evaporated further. When the concentration is nearly ten times the
concentration of initial sea water, salt (NaCl) crystallizes and precipitates
at the bottom.
While salt is precipitating, the concentration of the solution increases further. Even
before the total precipitation of sodium chloride is complete, magnesium chloride
(MgCl2) and magnesium sulphate (MgSO4) begin to precipitate. These give a bitter
taste to salt. The solution left after the precipitation of salt is known as mother
liquor or bittern.
Salt deposited in the third tank is taken out, heaped in prismatic piles at another
place and stored for a period of six months. Pure sodium chloride is not hygroscopic.
But if salt contains magnesium chloride and magnesium sulphate, it becomes bitter
and hygroscopic as well as deliquescent when exposed to the atmosphere. But, as
magnesium chloride and magnesium sulphate absorb moisture in the atmosphere
and go into solution, with the elapse of about six months most of them get removed,
salt is retained as a solid.
Extraction of essential oils
Volatile compounds obtained from plant materials are referred to as essential
oils. The reason for the characteristic aroma of some plant materials are volatile
compounds that they contain. Some main essential oils produced in our country are
:
• Cinnamon leaf oil
• Cinnamon bark oil
• Citronella oil
• Pepper oil
• Cardamom oil
• Nutmeg oil
• Clove bud oil
• Eucalyptus oil
65
For free distribution
Chemistry
Mixtures
Cinnamon bark oil, pepper oil and cardamom oil promote the flavour and the scent
of food. Cinnamon leaf oil, pepper oil and cardamom oil have medicinal properties
as well and are frequently used in the production of medicinal ointments, toothpaste
and the perfumes added to soap. Some plant parts in which essential oils are formed
are given below.
Plant/Plants
Part (s) in which essential oils are
formed
Veitiveria
Sandalwood
Cinnamon
Citronella
Lemongrass
Eucalyptus
Clove
Rose, Jasmine
Lemon, Lime
Nutmeg
Roots
Steam
Bark, Root, Leaf
Leaf
Leaf
Leaf
Floral parts
Flower
Fruit
Seed
The separating techniques such as steam distillation and solvent extraction are used
to extract essential oils. From cinnamon leaves, oil is obtained by passing steam
through them.
Extraction of essential oils by steam distillation
steam bath
Water
For free distribution
66
Cinnamon leaves
Cinnamon oil
and water
Mixtures
Chemistry
In this method steam generated by the steam bath is passed through the plant parts.
Essential oils, being mixed with water vapour, vapourises at a temperature below
100 0C. Condensation of this mixture of vapours gives essential oil and water. As
they are immiscible, they can be obtained separately.
Assignment 3.3.5
Inquire into the traditional method of cinnamon oil extraction in Sri Lanka and
prepare a report.
Obtaining essential oils by solvent extraction
Solvent extraction is another method of extracting essential oils. Organic solvents
such as ether, chloroform and toluene are used in this method. When plant parts are
shaken with the solvent, essential oil dissolves in the solvent. The essential oil is
separated by letting the solvent to vaporize.
Volatile oils in some plant parts can also be obtained by compressing them under a
suitable pressure.
Summary
• Matter can be divided into two parts, pure substances and mixtures.
• In natural environment, pure substances are very rare and what is more abundant
are mixtures.
• The substances formed by mixing two or more substances without any
chemical changes are called mixtures. The physical and chemical properties of
the components are retained even in the mixture. The components of a mixture
can be separated by physical methods.
• A mixture is a homogeneous mixture when its components are uniformly
distributed. If not, it is a heterogeneous mixture.
• A homogeneous mixture is also referred to as a solution. Characteristics such as
concentration, colour, density and transparency of any minute part of a solution
are identical. In heterogeneous mixtures these are different.
• In a solution the component present in a greater proportion is called the solvent
and the component that is less in proportion is known as the solute.
67
For free distribution
Mixtures
Chemistry
• Dissolving of a solute in a solvent depends on temperature, polar characteristics
related to the molecular properties of the solute and solvent as well as organic
or inorganic nature.
• The solubility of a gas in water depends on the pressure of that gas over water
and temperature.
• Different notations are used to indicate the composition of a mixture. Mass
fraction (m/m), volume fraction (V/V), mole fraction, mass-volume ratio
(m/V) and mole-volume ration (n/V) are some of them.
• Among the different notations used, mole-volume ratio (n/V) is also known
as the concentration. It has the units of mol dm-3 (moles per cubic decimetre)
• Solutes of known composition need to be prepared for various tasks in day to
day life. For this, various apparati are used in the laboratory.
• The components of mixtures are separated in everyday life as well as in
industry. Various methods are used for it.
• During sifting, flatting and winnowing, components are separated by using the
difference in density of the components. Sieving and filtration are carried out
making use of the difference in size of the component particles.
• Components can be separated by vaporization due to the difference in their
boiling points.
• The concentration of a solution is used in crystallization and recrystallization
where the concentration is made to exceed the saturated concentration.
• Some substances have a higher solubility in one solvent and lower solubility
in another.
• In solvent extraction, a solute dissolved in smaller quantity in one solvent
is drawn into another solvent in which it is more soluble. For this, the two
solvents must be immiscible.
• When separating components by distillation, the mixture is heated. The
components, that vaporize at their boiling points get removed from the mixture
and are collected at a different place by cooling.
• Depending on the differences of the techniques used and the properties of
components, distillation can be divided into three modes-simple distillation,
fractional distillation and steam distillation.
• In paper chromatography, a stream of a volatile solvent is passed through a
drop of a mixture placed on a special paper. In this, components are separated
from one another because of the difference of speed with which they travel
through the paper which in turn is caused by the differences in the strength of
attraction of the components to the paper (cellulose).
For free distribution
68
Chemistry
Mixtures
Exercises
01. Explain the meaning of the following terms.
a. Mixture
c. Solvent
f. Solution
b. Homogeneous mixture
d. Solute
g. Solubility
02. Write two properties of a homogeneous mixture or a solution
03. Explain how a solvent can be polar or non-polar
04. Explain the following observations scientifically.
a. Jak latex (koholle) cannot be washed away with water.
b. Styrofoam (regifoam) can be dissolved in petrol.
c. The moment the cap of a bottle of soda water is removed, gas bubbles
evolve.
05. Stones mixed with rice are removed by sifting. This is a mechanical method.
Which physical property of the components rice and stones is helpful in this
separation?
06. Write a similarity and a difference between vaporization and distillation used
to separate components in mixtures.
07. Calculate the concentration of the solutions given in the following table.
Solute Molar
mass
(g mol-1)
40
NaOH
Mass
dissolved
(g)
10
CaCl2
11
27.75
Na2CO3
106
53
HCl
36.5
36.5
Amount
of moles/
mol
10
40
=
0.25
27.75
111
=
0.25
53
106
=
0.5
36.5
36.5 =
1.0
Final
volume
Concentration of the
of the solution
(mol dm-3)
200 cm3
0.25
200
x 1000 = 1.25
500 cm3
2 dm3
0.5 dm3
69
For free distribution
Mixtures
Chemistry
08. What is the mass of magnesium chloride (MgCl2) required to prepare
500 cm3 of a 0.5 mol dm-3 magnesium chloride solution.
(Mg= 24, Cl = 35.5)
09. Select mixture/ mixtures that the components can be separated by
crystallization
a) Mixture of salt water
c) Mixture of acetic acid and water d) Mixture of copper sulphate and water
b) Mixture of ethanol and water
10. Several salts are precipitated in the tanks during the production of salt.
Arrange the precipitated salts CaCO3, CaSO4, NaCl and MgCl2 according
to the descending order of their solubility.
11. What is/are the compound/ compounds precipitated in manufacturing
salt that dissolve in the atmospheric water vapour out of the following?
(compounds with deliquescent quality)
CaCO3, CaSO4, NaCl, MgCl2
12. You are given a saturated solution of salt. What could you do to dissolve
some more salt in that solution?
13. Iodine is not soluble in water. Name two solvents that more iodine be
dissolved?
14. Name two instances that solvent extraction is used.
15. What are the qualities of existing and the second solvents when the
mixture is separated from an existing solvent into a another solvent?
16. What physical qualities of the components are used when they are
separated by using distillation?
17. State one similarity and one difference between Simple and Fractional
distillation
18. When setting the Liebig condenser for distillation, it is fixed with a slant
and the vapour is inserted through the top end of the condenser. The water
is inserted from the bottom. What is the importance of.
I. Inserting vapour from the top
II. Inserting water from the bottom
For free distribution
70
Mixtures
Chemistry
19. Name some essential oils produced by vapour distillation in Sri Lanka.
20. What is the technique you can use to find out the constituent colours of a
coloured toffee in the market ?
Mixtures
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Components
Solution
Solvent
Solute
Solubility
Organic Solvents
Inorganic Solvents
Concentration
Distillate
Crystallization
Recrystallization
Precipitation
Solvent Extraction
Distillation
Fractional Distillation
Steam Distillation
Chromatographic
Glossary
ñY%K
iucd;Sh
úIucd;Sh
ix>gl
ødjKh
ødjlh
ødjH
ødjH;dj
ldnksl ødjl
wdldnksl ødjl
idkaøKh
wdiQ;h
iaMálSlrKh
mqkiaMálSlrKh
wjlafIamùu
ødjl ksiaidrKh
ir, wdijkh
Nd.sl wdijkh
yqud, wdijkh
j¾Kf,aL Ys,amh
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P»øÁPÒ
HPÂÚ©õÚ
£À¼Ú©õÚ
£uõºzu[PÒ
Pøµ\À
Pøµ¨£õß
Pøµ¯®
PøµvÓß
÷\uÚ Pøµ¨£õß
A÷\uÚ Pøµ¨£õß
ö\ÔÄ
BÂ
£Î[PõUPÀ
«Í¨£Î[PõUPÀ
ÃÌ£iÄ
Pøµ¨£õß
¤›zöuk¨¦
Põ´a] Ái¨¦
£Sv£hU Põ´a]
Ái¨¦
öPõv }µõÂU
Põ´a] Ái¨¦
{Ó¨£S¨¤¯À
•øÓ
71
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Waves and their
applications
Physics
04
You have seen the ripples formed when you drop a pebble onto a still water surface.
The disturbance caused by the pebble spreads over the water surface in the form of
circles centered around the point where the pebble hit the water surface as shown
in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1 – Formation of ripples on a water surface.
If you hold a rope horizontally as shown in Figure 4.2, and then shake the rope up
and down, you will observe ripples forming in the rope. Here too the disturbance
caused by the hand travels along the rope.
Figure 4.2 – Formation of ripples on a horizontal string
Such a disturbance propagating through a medium or space is known as a wave.
If you place an object like a plastic ball on the water surface and then disturb the
water surface, how would the plastic ball move?
You will observe that the plastic ball moves up and down perpendicular to the water
surface. In order for the ball to move up and down, energy must be transmitted to
the ball. Here, energy was transmitted to the ball through the water waves.
An important property of waves is that they carry energy from one point to another.
This energy transmission takes place in a manner that does not transmit the substance
of the medium between the points concerned.
For free distribution
72
Physics
Waves and their Applications
As an example, when a water wave travels on a water surface, although the water
particles at each point move up and down, the water particles do not travel along
with the water wave.
● Wave Motion
In the two examples given above, the waves propagate through a certain medium.
The medium in the case of water waves is water. The medium in the case of waves
propagating along the rope is the material of the rope. The motion of the particles
in each medium transmits energy in the form of waves through the medium even
though the particles themselves do not travel along with the wave. Apart from the
two media mentioned above, waves propagate through many other media.
We hear various sounds through sound waves propagating through air. Sound
propagates not only through air but also through liquids and solids.
In addition to waves that travel through various media, there are waves traveling
without a material medium. Light is an example for a wave that travels without
a medium. Although there are regions between the sun and the earth without any
material medium, the earth receives light and heat from the sun. Light and heat
from the sun arrive at the earth as electromagnetic waves and a material medium is
not required for the propagation of electromagnetic waves.
Radio waves too are a form of electromagnetic waves. Radio programs transmitted
by a radio transmission station reach the radio set in your home through air.
However, air is not required for radio transmissions.
4.1 Mechanical Waves
Wave motion can be studied using a slinky. A slinky is a coil formed with a steel
wire. Figure 4.3 shows a slinky.
Let us do activity 4.1. to investigate wave motion.
Figure 4.3 - Figure of a slinky
73
For free distribution
Physics
Activity 4.1
Waves and their Applications
Apparatus: A slinky
² Place a slinky on a table as shown in Figure 4.4
² Hold one end of the slinky and shake it to left and right on the plane of the
table.
Slinky
direction of wave
4.4 - Demonstration of the formation of waves using a slinky
You will see a wave propagating through the slinky as shown in the figure.
The wave propagating along this slinky is an example for a wave that needs a
medium for propagation. Waves that need a material medium for propagation are
known as mechanical waves. Waves formed on water surfaces, sound waves that
travel in air, and waves formed on a guitar string when the string is plucked are
some examples for mechanical waves.
For the propagation of mechanical waves, the participation of the particles in the
medium is essential. Based on the direction of motion of the particles of the medium
and the direction of propagation of the wave, mechanical waves can be divided into
two categories.
1' Transverse waves
2' Longitudinal waves
For free distribution
74
Physics
4.1.1 Transverse Waves
Activity 4.2
Apparatus: A slinky, a few pieces of ribbon.
Waves and their Applications
² Tie pieces of ribbon at several places on the slinky.
² Place the slinky on the table as in activity 4.1 and shake it to left and right on
the plane of the table.
² Observe how each piece of ribbon moves.
Slinky
piece of
a ribbon
4.5 - Demonstration of the formation of transverse waves using a slinky
direction of wave
In this case, the wave propagates from the end held by the hand towards the fixed
end. You will observe that the wave is travelling in a direction perpendicular to the
direction of the ribbons are moving. Such waves that propagate in a direction
perpendicular to the direction the particles of the medium move are called
transverse waves. Therefore, this wave is a transverse wave.
The water waves generated by disturbing a still water surface by dropping an object
such as a pebble, water particles of the medium move up and down within a certain
range while the wave travels in a direction perpendicular to that.
We mentioned before that when we disturb a water surface after placing a floating
object such as a plastic or rubber ball on the surface, the floating object moves up
and down. From the up and down motion of the floating object we can understand
that the force exerted on the object by the water particles is vertical. That means
the water particles move up and down while the waves spread in a direction
perpendicular to this. Therefore, the waves that travel on the water surface are
transverse waves.
75
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
particle
motion
particle
motion
direction of wave propagation
Figure 4.6 Direction of motion of the particles of the medium
As shown in Figure 4.6, in a transverse wave, the particles of the medium move in a
direction perpendicular to the direction of the wave. Figure 4.7 shows how the cross
section of a water wave appears at a given instance. The arrow heads indicate the
direction that the water particles are moving at that instance.
a crest
A
B
a trough
C
D
Figure 4.7 – Cross section of a water wave
Direction
of wave
The particles at points A and B have traveled the maximum distance in the upward
direction. Such points in a wave are known as crests. The particles at C and D
have traveled the maximum distance in the downward direction. Such points of a
wave are known as troughs.
As shown in Figure 4.8, the waves formed by shaking one end of a string up and
down whose other end is tied to a post also belong to the category of transverse
waves.
up
down
motion of string
direction of wave propagation
Figure 4.8 - Formation of transverse waves in a string
For free distribution
76
Physics
4.1.2 Longitudinal Waves
Activity 4.3
Waves and their Applications
Apparatus: A slinky, a piece of ribbon
Place the slinky on a table and fix one end. Tie a ribbon on one coil and move the
free end of the slinky forward and backward as shown in Figure 4.9. When the
free end is pushed forward, the coils near that end are bunched up. This is called a
compression. When the free end is pulled back, the coils will stretched-out. This is
called a rarefaction.
transmission of energy
compression
rarefaction
direction of motion of partiches
piece of a ribbon
Figure 4.9. Demonstration of the formation of longitudinal waves using a slinky
Compressions are formed when the slinky is pushed forward while rarefactions are
formed when the free end is moved backward. As a result of this, a wave propagates
along the slinky. By observing the motion of the ribbon you can see in which
direction the parts of the spring move.
If the particles of the medium oscillate parallel to the direction of wave
propagation, such waves are known as longitudinal waves. You will observe
that the waves formed in the slinky in this activity are longitudinal waves.
Sound a tuning fork and touch one of its two arms with your finger tip. You will
sense a small vibration in your finger tip. The reason for this is the alternative
contacts and removal of contact of the tuning fork arm with your finger. The back
and forth motions in the arms of the tuning fork are known as vibrations. We can
hear sounds through the waves generated by such vibrations. Such waves that
cause the sensation of hearing are known as sound waves. Sound waves generated
in air are another example for longitudinal waves.
77
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Transverse Waves
Particles move perpendicular to the
direction of wave propagation.
Propagate along the surfaces of solids
and liquids or along strings, wires etc.
Longitudinal Waves
Particles move parallel to the direction
of wave propagation.
Propagate through solids, liquids and
gases.
Eg : Water waves
Eg : Sound waves
4.1.3 Physical quantities associated with wave motion
Waves are disturbances that spread from one point to another. Therefore waves have
variations that depend on both time and distance. In the waves that we observe in
nature, quite often these variations show complex forms. However, in this lesson
we will only consider waves of a very simple form known as sinusoidal waves.
The graph in Figure 4.10 shows how the displacement from the central position of
a particle taking part in the wave motion varies with time.
Extra Knowledge
For example, at time t0 the displacement of that particle is zero. With time, the
displacement of this particle increases and at time t1 it takes a maximum positive
value. After that the displacement starts to decrease, becomes zero at time t2 and
then increases in the negative direction. At time t3 it takes a maximum negative
value and then becomes zero again at t4 . The motion of the particle from time
t0 to t4 is called one oscillation. In addition to the word oscillation, the word
vibration is also used to describe such motions. If this motion is slow, it is called
an oscillation and if it is fast, it is called a vibration.
The graph in Figure 4.11 shows how the displacement from the central position of
each particle along the travel path of the wave varies with the distance from the
source to each of the particles.
displacement
amplitude
a one wave
a crest
to t1
t2
t3
t4
T
(period)
time
a trough
Figure 4.10 – Variation of displacement of a single particle, with time
For free distribution
78
Physics
displacement
Waves and their Applications
amplitude
a crest
λ
^wave length
a one wave
λ
distance from the
source
λ
(wavelength)
a trough
Figure 4.11 – Variation of displacement of particles with the distance from the source, at a
given moment
The shape of a transverse wave that we see in a single moment, like the wave
traveling along a string shown in figure 4.8, is the same as the shape of the graph
of Figure 4.11 showing the variation of the displacement of the particles with the
distance from the source at a given instance. Because the particle displacement
in longitudinal waves takes place in the same direction as the direction of wave
propagation, we can not see the form of the graph in a similar manner as for transverse
waves. However, if we somehow measure and plot the variation of the displacement
with distance we will obtain a graph like that shown in Figure 4.11.
With the help of these graphs we can define some physical quantities associated
with waves.
● Amplitude of a Wave
The maximum displacement shown by the particles taking part in the wave motion
is known as the amplitude of the wave.
● Wave length of a Wave
The distance between one particle and the closest next particle taking part in the
wave motion having the same state of motion is known as the wavelength (λ) of
the wave. As an example, a particle on a trough or a crest of the wave shown in
Figure 4.10 has reached its maximum displacement. A particle on the next trough or
crest also has the same state of motion. Therefore, the distance between these two
particles, that is the distance between two consecutive troughs or crests is equal to
the wavelength.
● Period
The time taken by a particle for a complete oscillation is known as the period (T).
The time taken by a wave to travel a distance equal to the wavelength is also equal
to the period. (figure 4.10)
79
For free distribution
Physics
● Frequency
Waves and their Applications
The number of oscillations carried out by a particle in a unit time is known as the
frequency (f). Frequency is equal to the reciprocal of the period. The unit used
to measure the frequency is known as Hertz (Hz) and one Hertz is defined as one
oscillation per second.
f = 1
T
● Speed
A wave travels a distance equal to the wavelength (λ) in a time interval equal to the
period (T). Therefore its speed is given by v = λ/ T or v = f λ.
Extra Knowledge
Speed (v)
m s-1
=
frequency (f) ×
Hz
wavelength (λ)
m
4.2 Electromagnetic Waves
The figure shown here is a photograph of a radio
telescope. The antenna of this telescope receives radio
waves emitted at by very distant stars. Understanding
the information contained in those waves helps us to
understand more about the history of the universe.
Radio waves are electromagnetic waves. Now let us
consider more about electromagnetic waves.
The participation of material particles of a medium is not required for the propagation
of electromagnetic waves. While electromagnetic waves consist of electric fields
and magnetic fields that oscillate in directions perpendicular to each other, the wave
propagates in a direction perpendicular to the directions of both the electric and
magnetic fields as shown in Figure 4.12. Therefore electromagnetic waves belong
to the class of transverse waves.
For free distribution
80
Physics
Waves and their Applications
λ
wave length
electric
field
g
e ti c
n
f i e l d
m a
direction of
the wave
Figure 4.12 - Electric and magnetic fields of an electromagnetic wave
All electromagnetic waves propagate with the speed of 2.988 × 108 ms-1 in a vacuum
(It is often taken as 3 × 108 m s-1 in calculations). Speed of electromagnetic waves in
material media is less than the speed in a vacuum and accordingly the wavelength
also changes. For electromagnetic waves, the speed c is given by the relationship
c = f λ where f is the frequency and λ is the wavelength.
Characteristics of electromagnetic waves
² Electromagnetic waves are not affected by external electric or magnetic fields.
² They do not require a material medium for propagation.
² They travel at a speed of 3 × 108 m s-1 in a vacuum.
4.2.1 Electromagnetic Spectrum
The characteristics of electromagnetic waves vary significantly in various frequency
ranges. Various frequency ranges identified by such characteristics are known as
the electromagnetic spectrum. Main types of electromagnetic waves belonging to
the electromagnetic spectrum are listed in the table below.
Type of Waves
Gamma rays
X rays
Ultra-violet rays
Visible rays
Infra-red rays
Micro waves
Radio waves
Frequency range (Hz)
> 3 × 1019
3 × 1017 - 3 × 1019
7.69 × 1014 - 3 × 1017
4.28 × 1014 - 7.69 × 1014
3 × 1012 - 4.28 × 1014
3 × 109
< 3 × 109
- 3 × 1012
81
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
s
y
a
r
a
m
m
a
G
s
y
a
r
x
m
u
r
t
c
e
p
s
c
i
t
e
n
g
a
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E
–
3
1
.
4
e
r
u
g
i
F
t
r
o
h
s
)
m
(
h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
w
g
n
o
l
3
1
-
0
1
2
1
-
0
1
1
1
-
0
1
0
1
-
0
1
9
-
0
1
8
-
0
1
7
-
0
1
6
-
0
1
5
-
0
1
4
-
0
1
3
-
0
1
2
-
0
1
1
-
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
1
3
0
1
4
0
1
h
g
i
h
s
y
a
r
a
m
m
a
G
s
y
a
r
x
t
e
l
o
i
v
-
a
r
t
l
s
y
a
r
U
s
y
a
r
e
l
b
i
s
i
V
s
y
a
r
d
e
r
-
a
r
f
n
I
s
e
v
a
w
o
r
c
i
M
1
2
0
1
0
2
0
1
9
1
0
1
8
1
0
1
7
1
0
1
6
1
0
1
5
1
0
1
4
1
0
1
3
1
0
1
2
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
9
0
1
8
0
1
7
0
1
6
0
1
5
0
1
)
z
H
(
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
w
o
l
82
For free distribution
Physics
4.2.2. Applications of Electromagnetic Waves
Waves and their Applications
² Visible Light
Visible light is the range of the electromagnetic spectrum to which our eyes are
sensitive. It is only a narrow band in the electromagnetic spectrum. The frequencies
of the visible light range from 4.28 × 1014 Hz to 7.69 × 1014 Hz corresponding to
a wavelength range from 690 nm to 400 nm. The region containing the lowest
wavelength (highest frequency) in this range appears violet to the human eye.
When the wavelength increases (frequency decreases) gradually the color changes
to indigo, blue up to red. These are the colors that we identify as the seven colors
in the rainbow.
² Gamma rays
Gamma rays are a type of waves emitted
by radioactive elements. Frequencies of
gamma rays are extremely high and so
are the energies possessed by them.
Gamma rays have the ability even to
penetrate thick sheets of steel as well as
concrete slabs. Since gamma rays can
destroy living cells they are used to
destroy cancer cells.
Figure 4.14 – An instance where gamma rays
are used
Gamma rays are also used to sterilize utensils used for food and surgical instruments.
² X-rays
X–rays are mostly used to take photographs of internal organs of the human body.
Although X-rays travel quite easily through the soft tissues in the body, their
intensity decreases rapidly when traveling through the bones of the body. When
the X–ray generator is turned on, X–rays propagate through the relevant part of the
body of the person being photographed and thus forms an image of that part of the
body. Excessive exposure to X–rays can cause cancers.
X–rays are generated by bombarding high
speed electrons on metal targets. Then part
of the kinetic energy of the electrons gets
converted to X–rays.
X–rays are also used to examine the baggage of
airline passengers and cargo inside containers
transported by ships, without opening them.
Figure 4.15 – X-ray imaging
83
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Extra knowledge
X - rays are generated by allowing a fast beam of electrons to hit a metal target.
A part of the kinetic energy of the electrons is then converted to X-rays.
² Ultraviolet radiation
Ultraviolet means ‘above violet’. Violet is the color having the highest frequency
out of the seven colors that form the visible spectrum. Ultraviolet radiation is a
type of rays having a frequency range above that of violet and is invisible to the
human eye. Although ultraviolet rays are invisible to the human eye, it has been
found that insects like bees can detect ultraviolet rays. Sunlight contains a small
amount of ultraviolet rays. Ultraviolet rays are also produced in electric discharge
and from mercury vapor lamps.
Since these rays produce vitamin D in the human body, it is useful to be exposed
to sunlight to some extent. However, over exposure to ultraviolet rays can cause
cataract in the eye and cancers in the skin.
exposed
Ultraviolet radiation is used in
hospitals to kill germs. Certain
chemical substances show a glitter
to ultraviolet
when
radiation. This phenomenon is
used in places like banks to check
hidden symbols in currency notes.
Such chemicals are also added to
some washing powders. Clothes
washed with
such washing
powders show a brightness when
exposed to sunlight.
² Infrared Radiation
Figure 4.16 – An instance of generating ultraviolet rays
The range of frequencies below the red color that is not visible to us is known as
infrared radiation. Because infrared radiation is emitted by heated bodies and we
feel a warm sensation when infrared radiation falls on our skin, infrared radiation
is often referred to as heat rays.
For free distribution
84
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Infrared radiation is emitted by our bodies
too. Heat photographs are taken with the
aid of heat rays emitted by body organs.
Certain diseases can be identified using
such photographs.
Infrared radiation is used to send signals to television sets from remote controls.
Most of the cameras in mobile telephones and computers are sensitive to infrared
radiation. Infrared radiation is also used for physiotherapy treatments.
Figure 4.17 - A heat photograph
(a) A remote control
(b) An infrared camera
Figure 4.18 – Instances of using infrared waves
² Microwaves
The range of frequencies below the infrared frequencies is known as microwaves.
Microwaves are used in RADAR systems, mobile telephones and microwave
ovens.
Extra knowledge
Water and fat in food have the ability to absorb microwaves and convert that
energy into vibrational kinetic energy (heat). This is the principle behind the
operation of microwave ovens.
An instrument known as the magnetron is used to produce microwaves in microwave
ovens and radar systems that need high power microwaves for their operation.
85
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Microwaves too can cause adverse effects on our bodies. Generally microwave
ovens are produced so that microwaves do not leak out from the oven. However as
a precautionary measure it is better not to stay too close to microwave ovens when
they are in operation. It is suspected that the excessive use of mobile telephones
can cause harm to the brain.
magnetron
enclosure inside
which food is cooked
Figure 4.19 – A microwave oven
food
² Radio Waves
Radio waves have the longest wavelengths and the shortest frequencies of the
electromagnetic spectrum. They are used in long distance communications. Radio
waves are produced using radio frequency oscillators. When radio waves fall on an
aerial, it received the information carried by the wave.
Antennas are used for transmitting and receiving radio waves. Information is
transmitted through radio waves by modifying the amplitude or the frequency of a
radio wave according to the information to be transmitted.
Figure 4.20 – Transmission and receiving of radio waves
For free distribution
86
Physics
4.3 Sound
Waves and their Applications
If you listen carefully to various sounds in your surroundings early in the morning,
you would hear many sounds. It is by listening that you would be able to enjoy
when the musical instruments are played. The type of energy that produces the
sensation of hearing in our ears is known as acoustic energy.
Figure 4.21 – Playing oriental music
The type of frogs known as Hyla tree frog shown
in figure 4.22 is found in South America. They
are capable of amplifying their voice using an
inflatable balloon like body organ under their
throat. Only the male frog can generate this sound
and their voice travels about ten time further than
the sounds from other varieties of frogs. This
sound is generated when the air dispelled by the
balloon passes through two stretched membranes at the bottom of the mouths of the
frogs giving rise to vibrations in the membranes.
Figure 4.22 – Hyla tree frog
Many animals have the capability of producing sounds
by vibrating an organ in their body. A buzzing bee makes
sound waves by moving its wings to and fro repeatedly
very fast.
Crickets make their sound by rubbing their wings
together.
Not only animal sounds but, all sounds are generated by vibrations of objects.
We hear those sounds when the resulting sound waves propagate through air and
reach our ears. Our vocal cords vibrate, causing the air around them to vibrate and
producing sound waves in the air.
We will investigate the propagation of acoustic or sound waves, their characteristics
and applications in this lesson.
87
For free distribution
Physics
4.3.1 Propagation of Sound Waves
Waves and their Applications
In order to understand how sound waves propagate in air,
let us consider a sound wave generated by a loud-speaker.
Sound is generated by a loud-speaker when a membrane
inside the loud-speaker is set into vibrations.
Figure 4.23 (a) shows the distribution of air molecules
can be seen in front of the loud speaker. when the membrane is not vibrating.
Suppose that the membrane starts vibrating by first moving to the right. When the
membrane moves to the right the air molecules in front of it are pushed forward
giving rise to a layer of compressed air as shown in Figure 4.23 (b).This compressed
region moves forward with the kinetic energy transferred to the air molecules by
the membrane.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.23 – Propagation of sound as longitudinal waves
When the membrane moves to the left, a region of rarefactions is formed in the air
layer adjacent to it as shown in Figure 4.23 (c). When the membrane moves to the
right again, another layer of compressed air is formed which too moves to the right
as shown in Figure 4.23 (d).
For free distribution
88
Physics
Waves and their Applications
The membrane alternatively generates compressions and rarefactions in the air, all
of which travel forward with the same speed. These compressions and rarefactions
are known as sound waves. Note that each air molecule only vibrates back and
forth around a mean position although the compressions and rarefactions move
forward. Sound is longitudinal waves.
Sound propagates not only through air.
Sound propagates through water even
faster than through air. That is why
there are methods of communication
through water. Whales use sound waves
to communicate among themselves.
Sound waves travel through water with
a speed of about 1400 ms-1. Sound
propagation is even better through
solids.
Figure 4.24 - Communication by whales
using sound waves
Speed of sound waves through steel is about 5000 m s-1. That is why the sound of
a train approaching from a distance can be clearly heard through the steel rails.
Snakes can detect vibrations in the
ground through its lower jaw bone.
These vibrations are then transmitted
to it through the bones. This way, the
snake hears the foot-steps of its prey.
Unlike light, a medium is essential
for sound to spread. That means
sound waves are mechanical waves.
Therefore they do not travel through
a vacuum. The following simple
experiment illustrates that sound does not travel through a vacuum.
Figure 4.25 – Perception of sound by a snake
through vibrations in the ground
89
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
to the vacuum pump
electric bell
bell jar
Figure 4.26 – Illustrating that sound waves needs a medium for propagation
As shown in Figure 4.26, an electric bell is fixed inside a bell jar and its connecting
wires are connected to a power supply and a switch outside the jar. The bell jar is
connected to a vacuum pump. The vacuum pump can pump out the air from inside
the jar. After starting the ringing of the electric bell, the vacuum pump is turned on.
You will observe that the sound of the electric bell becomes fainter gradually and
finally no sound is heard.
The instance that the sound is no longer heard is when the interior of the bell jar
becomes a vacuum. When the vacuum pump is turned on, the air inside the bell
jar is gradually removed and ultimately it becomes a vacuum. This experiment
illustrates that sound cannot propagate through a vacuum and that a medium is
essential for sound waves to travel through.
4.3.2 Speed of Sound
We hear the sound of thunder a short
while after we see the light from a
lightning strike taking place at a distant
point. We see the light emitted in a
lightning strike when that light travels
towards us and enters our eyes. Light
travels at the speed of 300 000 km s-1
(3 × 108 m s-1). Therefore it takes only
a very short time for us to see the light
from a lightning strike. There is a short time gap between seeing the light and
hearing the thunder because it takes a longer time for the sound wave to travel
to our ear than it takes for the light to travel to our eyes from the point where the
lightning strike took place.
Figure 4.27 – Light is seen a short while before
the sound of thunder from a lightning strike
The characteristics of waves discussed in section 4.1.3 are common to sound waves too.
For free distribution
90
Physics
Waves and their Applications
♦ The speed of sound at 0 oC in dry air is about 330 m s-1. As the temperature
increases, the speed of sound waves in air also increases. The speed of sound
at 30 oC in dry air is about 350 m s-1.
♦ The speed of sound in water is about 1400 m s-1. This means that the speed of
sound in water is about four times as the speed of sound in air. The speed of
sound through a steel rod is about 5000 m s-1.
4.3.3 Characteristics of Sound
The sound of some musical instruments is of a high pitch. The sound emitted by the
violin in soft. The sound of thunder caused by a lightning strike is loud. The above
statements describe some characteristics of sound waves.
Properties of sound that makes it possible to distinguish different sounds are called
sound characteristics. That means, sound characteristics are the sensations produced
in the ear that helps us to distinguish different sounds.
There are three main characteristics of sound.
1' Pitch
2' Loudness
3' Quality of sound
² Pitch
Activity 4.4
● Clamp a hacksaw blade between two blocks of wood so that its free end juts
out about 10 cm.
● Vibrate the blade and
listen to the sound it
generates.
● Increase the length of the
blade jutting out in steps
of 5 cm at time listening
to the sound emitted.
You will notice that the
sharpness of the sound
decreases gradually.
● Pitch is the quality of
sound depends on by
the physical quantity
frequency.
one vibration
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.28 - Vibration of a hacksaw blade clamped at
one end
91
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
When the length of the free end of the blade is increased, the frequency of vibrations
of the blade decreases gradually. Accordingly, the pitch of the sound generated by
the blade also decreases. The pitch of the sound generated by an object increases
when its frequency of vibration increases while the pitch of the sound decreases
when its frequency of vibration decreases. Out of the musical notes, the frequency
of the note middle C is 256 Hz. The frequency of the note higher C is 512 Hz.
Therefore the pitch of the higher C is twice as high as the pitch of the middle C.
The oscillation of the air molecules around their central position when a sound
wave travels in air can be observed using a cathode ray oscilloscope in the form of
a graph plotted against time. When a microphone is connected to an oscilloscope
as shown in Figure 4.29, and strike a tuning fork on a rubber stopper to generate a
sound, the oscilloscope screen displays the graph corresponding to the sound wave
generated. The shape of the graph displayed on the cathode ray oscilloscope is
known as the wave form of the sound wave that gave rise to the graph.
Figure 4.29 - The shape of a sound wave displayed on the
screen of a cathode ray oscilloscope
Figure 4.30 shows the shapes of two sound waves generate from two tuning forks
one with a high pitch or high frequency and the other with a lower pitch or lower
frequency.
For free distribution
92
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Lower pitch
(Lower frequency and longer period)
(Higher frequency and shorter period)
Higher pitch
Figure 4.30 - The shapes of two sound waves of different pitch displayed on the screen of a
cathode ray oscilloscope
² Loudness
Tap softly on a drum. Next tap the drum with a larger force. Study the difference
in the sound level. The difference is the difference in the loudness. The loudness
of a sound wave depends on the amount of energy it carries to the ear. Therefore,
loudness is the sensation in the ear that depends on the amount of energy carried by
the sound wave.
The sound generated by plucking a stretched string is louder when it is plucked
harder so as to displace it further from its stationary position. In order to displace
the string further, a larger amount of work has to be done on the string. Then the
string imparts a larger amount of energy to the sound wave it generates. When
the string is displaced further from the stationary position, the amplitude of the
vibration becomes larger and the amplitude of the sound wave generated by the
string also becomes large. This means that there is a relationship between the
loudness of a sound and the amplitude of the corresponding sound wave. Therefore,
loudness can also be considered as the characteristic of sound that varies according
to the amplitude of a sound wave. Loudness increases with increasing amplitude.
Loudness decreases with when the amplitude decreases. Figure 4.31 shows wave
forms of two sound waves viewed using a cathode ray oscilloscope, one with a
higher level of loudness and the other with a lower level of loudness.
93
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
High level of loudness
(High amplitude)
Low level of loudness
(Low amplitude)
Figure 4.31 – Waveforms of two notes with high and low levels of loudness
² Quality of Sound
When a piano and a violin are played, even if both of them play a note with the same
pitch and same loudness it is still possible to identify the sound of each instrument.
Such an identification is possible due to a characteristic known as the quality of
sound.
Figure 4.32 - Playing a piano and a violin
Figure 4.33 shows the wave forms of a musical note played with the same pitch using
a tuning fork, a violin and a piano when viewed through a cathode ray oscilloscope.
Even though all three waves have the same frequency, it is clear from figure 4.33
For free distribution
94
Physics
Waves and their Applications
that their wave forms are different. The reason for being able to identify each
instrument playing the note is the difference in their wave forms. Therefore, the
quality of sound is the sensation in the ear which varies according to the wave form
of a given sound.
tuning fork
violin
piano
Figure 4.33 – Wave forms of the same note with the same pitch played by different instruments
4.3.4 Hearing Range
We cannot hear all the sounds in our surroundings. Certain sounds that we cannot
hear are heard by other animals. While animals such as elephants that have large
ears can hear sounds of very low frequencies, the ears of animals like bats and
whales are sensitive to very high frequencies. It is generally considered that the
frequency range that can be heard by the human ear is from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz.
This frequency range is known as hearing range of human ear. However, the high
frequency limit audible to the human ear decreases gradually with age.
Sounds of frequency below 20 Hz are called infra-sound and sounds
of frequency above 20000 Hz are called ultrasound. Therefore,
ultrasound waves are sound waves with frequencies above the hearing
range of humans.
While Rabbits, dolphins and bats can hear
frequencies above 20,000 Hz (ultrasound),
elephants can hear frequencies below 20 Hz
(infra-sound). Dogs can hear sounds up to
about 40,000 Hz.
95
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Bats make use of ultrasound waves to fly avoiding obstacles at night. Bats emit
ultrasound waves while flying. These waves are reflected back if they encounter an
obstacle. When the bat receives the reflected waves it can judge the position of the
obstacles and fly avoiding them.
Sonar
Returning sound waves
Figure 4.34 - A bat flying by avoiding obstacles with the use of ultrasound
Dolphins use ultrasound waves to find small fish for prey and to avoid sharks that
attack the dolphins. Dolphins also use ultrasound waves to communicate among
themselves.
Figure 4.35 - Dolphins use ultrasound waves to communicate among themselves
² Uses of Ultrasound
Ultrasound waves are used for various important tasks. Ultrasound waves are
employed to find the depth of the sea. For this, an instrument called SONAR
(Sound Navigation and Ranging) fixed to the bottom of a ship emits an ultrasound
pulse. The depth of the sea can be found by measuring the time taken by these
ultrasound pulses to return to the original position after being reflected from the
bottom of the sea.
For free distribution
96
Physics
Waves and their Applications
transmitter
ultrasound pulse
transmission
ship
water
Figure 4.36 - Finding the depth of the sea using ultrasound waves
detector
reflected
pulses
bottom of
the sea
In addition to measuring the depth of the sea, ultrasound waves are used to
investigate schools of fish and to detect remnants of capsized ships.
Example 1
If the time taken by ultrasound waves transmitted by a ship to reach the detector
again after reflection from the sea bottom is 4 s, find the distance between the
ship and the bottom of the sea. (Assume that the speed of sound in sea water is
1500 m s-1).
Distance the sound travel in 4 s = 1500 × 4
Distance between the ship and the bottom of the sea = 1500 × 4
= 3000 m
2
Ultrasound waves are used in ultrasound spectacles worn by blind people.
Ultrasound waves are used to examine internal organs of the human body. This
is known as ultrasound scanning. Ultrasound waves emitted by an ultrasound
transmitter placed on the chest of a patient are reflected back from the internal walls
of his heart. Using the reflected wave, information regarding the volume of blood
sent out during a single compression of the heart, the size of the heart and pulse rate
of the heart can be revealed.
Furthermore, ultrasound waves can be used to observe the womb and the condition
of the fetus inside the womb of a pregnant mother.
97
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Figure 4.37 – Examine the condition of the fetus inside
Figure 4.38 – An image of a fetus inside a womb
the womb using ultrasound waves
taken using ultrasound waves
An instance where ultrasound
waves are used to treat diseases
is the blasting of bladder stones
or calcium oxalate crystals by
sending ultrasound waves to
places where bladder stones
are found (This technology is
known as lithotripsy).
Figure 4.39 – Instrument used for blasting bladder stones by
using ultrasound waves
High frequency ultrasound waves do not enter air after traveling through a solid
medium. If an ultrasound wave traveling in a solid comes across an air gap, the wave
does not penetrate through the air gap. This principle is used to detect dangerous air
gaps and fractures in solid components of air planes.
Extra knowledge
Ultrasound waves are also used to solder metals. This is done by placing the
metals to be soldered in contact with one another and impinging the required
place with ultrasound waves. The vibrations that result cause the two metals to
rub each other generating a large amount of heat. This heat melts the metals at
the contact position soldering the two metals.
4.3.5 Musical Instruments
Constantly we hear various sounds. Some sounds are pleasing to the ear while
some are not. The wave forms observed on a cathode ray oscilloscope screen by
playing a tuning fork, a violin and a piano were shown in Figure 4.33. Although the
wave forms were different, they all show repeating patterns.
For free distribution
98
Physics
Waves and their Applications
The wave form of the noise emitted by machinery in a factory, if observed through
a cathode ray oscilloscope, would look like the wave shown in Figure 4.40.
Figure 4.40 – Wave form of a noise
This wave does not show a repeating pattern. This wave is composed of irregular
vibrations. The instruments that generate sound that is pleasing to the ear are
known as musical instruments. Musical instruments are built in such a way that
they generate periodic vibrations.
There are three main types of musical instruments.
² String instruments
² Percussion instruments
² Wind instruments
² String instruments
Musical instruments that generate sound by the vibrations of a stretched string such
as the violin, Sitar, Guitar, Banjo and Cello are known as string instruments.
sitar
guitar
violin
Figure 4.41 – Some string instruments
The frequency of sound generated by stringed instruments depends on the following
factors.
1' Length of the vibrating string
2' Tension of the string or the extent that the string is stretched
3' Mass of a unit length of the string
² Percussion instruments
Instruments generating sound by the vibration of stretched membrane, metal rods
or metal plates are known as percussion instruments. Such instruments have to
99
For free distribution
Physics
be tapped in order to generate sound.
Waves and their Applications
4.42 – Some percussion instruments
Thabla, rabana, dawula, udekki and thammattama are examples for percussion
instrumens. The xylophone is an instrument with vibrating metal rods. Thalampata
and the bell are instruments with vibrating metal plates.
In percussion instruments, the pitch depends on the area and the tension of the
membrane or the metal plate.
² Wind Instruments
Instruments like flute, saxophone, trumpet and clarinet generate sound by the
vibrations of air columns and are known as wind instruments.
Figure 4.43 – Some wind instruments
The pitch of wind instruments depend on the length of the air column.
For free distribution
100
Physics
Exercise 4.1
Waves and their Applications
(1) Group of children studied the spreading water waves generated in a pond
with still water by throwing stones onto the water surface.
(i) What happens to the energy of the waves?
(ii) Suppose you place a paper boat on the water surface and disturb the
water surface a small distance away from the boat. What change would
you observe in the paper boat? What does it illustrate?
(iii) Sketch a diagram to show what happens to the water surface.
(iv) Which type of mechanical waves do water waves belong to?
(v) In what way do the above waves differ from the sound waves traveling in
air?
(2) The end B of the metal blade AB shown below is clamped to a table
A
B
(i) It is made to vibrate by a force applied to the end A. Give a rough sketch
to illustrate one vibration generated in the blade. (Use the letters C and
D to show the maximum displacements.)
(ii) Describe what is meant by the amplitude using the points marked as A, C
and D.
(iii) If 50 vibrations take place during 5 seconds, find the frequency of
vibrations of the metal blade.
(iv) Vibrations of the metal blade gives rise to compressions and rarefactions
in air.
To what physical quantity related to sound waves in air is the distance
between two consecutive compressions equal to?
(v) (a) What is the sound characteristic that depends on the frequency?
(b) What is the sound characteristic that depends on the amplitude?
(c) The same musical note was played with several musical instruments,
each one could be identified separately. What characteristic of sound
does this depend on?
101
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
(3) Electromagnetic waves do not need a medium for propagation.
(i) Write down three characteristics of electromagnetic waves.
(ii) (a) What is the angle between the electric field and magnetic field
generated together in an electromagnetic wave?
(b) What is the angle between these two fields and the direction of
propagation of the electromagnetic wave?
(4) The figure below shows a segment of a string along which a transverse wave
is propagating.
D
A
E
B
C
(a) What physical quantity of a wave is the distance between the points D
and E equal to?
(b) The same distance above is shown by the distance between two other
points in the figure. What are these two letters?
(5) There are many musical instruments in the music room of your school.
(i) Name
(a) Two string instruments
(b) Two percussion instruments
(c) Two wind instruments
that you expect to find in the music room.
(ii) (a) Write down two factors on which the frequency of the sound generated
by a string instrument depends on.
(b) Write down two factors on which the frequency of the sound generated
by a wind instrument depends on.
(c) Write down two factors on which the frequency of the sound generated
by a percussion instruments depends on.
(6) Explain the following scientifically.
(i) When a ringing bell is held by hand, it stops ringing.
(ii) The pitch of a flute when played while the holes are opened one by one
becomes different from the pitch when all holes are closed.
(iii) Although the lightning and thunder both happen at the same time, there
is a delay between seeing the light and hearing the sound of thunder.
For free distribution
102
Physics
Summary
Waves and their Applications
² A wave is a disturbance traveling in a medium or in space.
² Waves that need a material medium to travel are called mechanical waves.
² Waves that propagate in a direction perpendicular to the direction of particle
motion are called transverse waves.
² Waves that propagate in the same direction as the particle motion are called
longitudinal waves.
²
amplitude
a crest
a trough
(wavelength)
² The time taken by one particle to complete a single oscillation is called the
period of oscillation.
² The number of oscillations of a single particle in one second is called
frequency.
² Electromagnetic waves do not need a material medium for propagation.
² Sound waves are a type of longitudinal waves.
² Sound waves need a medium for propagation.
² Pitch, loudness and quality of sound are three main characteristics of sound.
² The pitch of a sound depends on the frequency of the wave.
² The loudness depends on the amplitude of the wave.
² The quality of sound depends on the shape of the wave form.
² Sounds with regular periods are pleasing to the ear. Sounds without regular
periods produce noise.
² String instruments produce sounds through vibrations of strings, percussion
instruments make sounds by vibrations of membranes, rods or metal plates
and wind instruments make sounds by vibrations of air columns.
² The frequency range that can be heard by an animal is known as hearing
range of that animal.
² Sounds of frequency below 20 Hz are called infra-sound and sounds of
frequency above 20 000 Hz are called ultrasound.
103
For free distribution
Physics
Waves and their Applications
Glossary
Mechanical waves
- hdka;%sl ;rx.
- ö£õÔ•øÓ Aø»PÒ
Transverse waves
Longitudinal waves
- ;s¾hla ;rx.
- wkajdhdu ;rx.
- SÖUPø»PÒ
- ö|mhõ[S Aø»PÒ-
Period
Frequency
- wdj¾; ld,h
- BÁºzuÚ Põ»®
- ixLHd;h
- «iÓß
Electromagnetic waves
- úoHq;a pqïnl ;rx.
- ªßPõ¢u Aø»PÒ
Electromagnetic spectrum - úoHq;a pqïnl j¾Kdj,sh -- ªßPõ¢uz v¸]¯®
- mdrcïnq, lsrK
- PÈ³uõU Pvº¨¦ -
Ultraviolet radiation
Infrared radiation
- wfOdarla;
- ö\[RÌU Pvº¨¦
Micro waves
Sound waves
Hearing range
Infrasound
Ultrasound
Pitch
- CIqø ;rx.
- ~qUPø»PÒ
- èjks ;rx.
- Y%jH;d mrdih
- J¼ Aø»PÒ
- ÷PÒuS Ãa_
- wfOdaèjks
- RöÇõ¼
- w;sèjks
- ;dr;dj
- -PÈö¯õ¼ -
- _¸v
Quality of sound
- èjks .=Kh
- J¼°ß £s¦
Loudness
Amplitude
- yfå ier
- úia;drh
- Eµ¨¦
- Ãa\®
For free distribution
104
Physics
Geometrical Optics
Geometrical Optics
Physics
05
5.1 Reflection of light
We cannot see anything in the dark. The reason for this is that light is required to
give rise to visual sensation. We would be able to see an object only if light from
the object reaches our eyes.
Objects that emit light such as a candle flame or a light bulb are known as luminous
objects. We can see them because our eyes receive light from them. Objects that
do not emit light are known as non-luminous objects. When light from the Sun
or some artificial light source falls on such objects they reflect part of the light and
when the reflected light reaches our eyes we see the objects.
a luminous object
(Sun)
eye
a non-luminous object
Figure 5.1 – Seeing luminous and non-luminous objects
Light passes through some objects. They are known as transparent objects (eg: glass,
polythene). Objects through which light does not pass at all are known as opaque
objects (eg: stones, bricks). Light passes through some materials with irregular
changes of direction, making it impossible to see the objects on the other side clearly.
Such materials are known as translucent materials (eg: tissue paper, oil paper).
A light ray is represented by a straight line with an arrow head marked on it. The
arrow head is essential to indicate the direction of the light ray.
A light ray
105
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
A bundle of light rays is known as a light beam. A bundle of parallel rays form a parallel
light beam. A bundle of rays that meet at a certain point is known as a convergent light
beam. A bundle of rays that travel away from a given point is known as a divergent beam.
A convergent light beam
A divergent light beam A parallel light beam
Figure 5.2 – Beams of light
Let us review what we have learned about the reflection of light before.
The dressing table mirrors familiar to you are plane mirrors. The change in the
propagation direction of light rays incident on a plane mirror is known as reflection.
Figure 5.3 shows how a light ray (AB) incident perpendicularly on a plane mirror is
reflected. BA is the reflected ray.
M
B
N
A
Figure 5.3 – The way a light ray incident on a plain mirror is reflected
²
In figure 5.4, MN is a plane mirror. AB is a ray that is incident on point B of the
reflecting surface of the mirror and it is known as the incident ray. This ray is
reflected along BC.
² BX is an imaginary line drawn perpendicular to the mirror at the point of
incidence. It is known as the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of
incidence.
² The angle between the incident ray and the normal is known as the angle of
incidence (i). The angle between the reflected ray and the normal is known as
the angle of reflection (r).
M
A
MN - plane mirror
AB - incident ray
BC - reflected ray
BX - normal at the point incidence
ABX - angle of incidence ^i&
CBX - angle of reflection ^r&
B
N
i
r
X
C
Figure 5.4 – Reflection of a light ray from a
plane mirror
For free distribution
106
Physics
Geometrical Optics
You have learnt two laws of reflection of light before.
First Law
The incident ray, the reflected ray and the normal at the point of incidence lie on
the same plane.
Second Law
The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.
That is i = r
Now let us see how an image is formed when a point object is in front of a plane mirror.
I
Image
M
A
C
N
O
point object
B
D
Figure 5.5 – The formation of an image of a point object by a plane mirror
In figure 5.5, a point object O is placed in front of a plane mirror MN. OA and OC
are two rays propagating from the object towards the mirror. These two rays are
reflected respectively along AB and CD and reach the eye of the observer.
Not just these two rays, but many such rays from O are reflected by the mirror and
reach the observer’s eye.
The observer sees these rays as coming from the point I. Therefore the observer
sees as if the object is placed at I.
² No rays actually pass through this image. Because there are no light rays at the
location of the image, this image cannot be projected on a screen.
² An image like this is known as a virtual image.
² All images formed by plane mirrors are virtual.
² Distance from the object to the mirror (object distance) is equal to the distance
from the image to the mirror (image distance).
²
Images formed by plane mirrors are identical to the objects, but they are
lateral inverted. That means the right side of the object appears as its left side,
and vice versa.
107
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
The term AMBULANCE written in the front face of
)' However,
ambulances is inverted (
when the ambulance is going behind another vehicle, the
driver of the vehicle in front sees it through his rear view
mirror as AMBULANCE.
AMBULANCE
5.2 Curved (Spherical) Mirrors
We know that the type of mirrors called
convex mirrors are used in vehicles so that
the driver can see the road behind him from
both sides of the vehicle.
With these the driver can see a large area
behind the vehicle, as a small image. In
some shops, convex mirrors are used to
observe a large part of the shop for security
purposes.
Dentists use another type of curved mirrors
called concave mirrors to view inside the
mouth of patients. These mirrors show
enlarged images of teeth.
Concave mirrors are used for shaving too.
In both of these cases, the ability of concave
mirrors to produce enlarged images is used.
Figure 5.6 shows an enlarged image from concave mirror and a diminished image
from a convex mirror.
concave mirror
convex mirror
Figure 5.6 – Images formed by concave and convex mirrors
Now let us discuss more about curved mirrors.
Mirrors with curved reflecting surfaces are known as curved mirrors. If the curved
surface is a part of a sphere, the mirror is known as a spherical mirror.
For free distribution
108
Physics
Geometrical Optics
There are two main types of curved mirrors.
1' Concave mirrors
2' Convex mirrors
The reflecting surface of a concave mirror is curved
inward. The reflecting surface of a convex mirror is curved
outward.
Concave
mirror
Convex
mirror
Figure 5.7 shows that spherical mirrors are parts of hypothetical spheres.
concave
surface
centre of
curvature
C
C
pole
P
principal axis
convex surface
principal axis
P
pole
C
centre of
curvature
Figure 5.7 - Center of curvature, pole and principal axis of a spherical mirror
• The centre of each sphere (C) to which the mirror surface belongs is called the centre
of curvature of the mirror.
• The centre point of the curved mirror (P) is called the pole of the mirror.
• The line joining the pole P and the centre of curvature C is called the principal axis.
• The principal axis is perpendicular to the mirror surface at P.
5.2.1 Focal point of a curved mirror
For light rays coming along the principal axis, the incident angle is zero and
therefore the angle of reflection is also zero. Therefore light rays coming along the
principal axis reflect back along the same path.
Rays coming parallel to the principle axis towards a concave mirror pass through
a point on the principal axis after reflecting from the mirror. If a screen is placed
on that point so as to allow the reflected rays to fall on it, a small bright spot would
be visible. This point marked as F in Figure 5.8 is known as the focus or the focal
point of the mirror.
109
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
P
F
C
Focal point
Figure 5.8 – Converging a parallel beam of light after reflection
Now let us see what happens in the case of convex mirrors. As shown in figure
5.9, rays coming parallel to the principal axis and incident on a convex mirror are
reflected as a divergent beam. These divergent reflected rays appear to be coming
from the focal point F.
C
F
P
principal axis
Figure 5.9 - Diverging a parallel beam of light upon reflection from a convex mirror
The focal point of a spherical mirror is situated at the mid-point on the line
connecting the pole and the centre of curvature. The distance between the pole and
the focal point is known as the focal length of the spherical mirror. The distance
between the pole and the centre of curvature is known as the radius of curvature of
the spherical mirror. The radius of curvature (r) is exactly twice the focal length (f).
5.2.2 Reflection from a concave mirror
(i) Rays coming along the principal axis
of a concave mirror return along the
principal axis after reflection.
light rays are
In ray diagrams
drawn as if they are reflected by
the perpendicular line drawn to the
principal axis at the pole P.
P
Figure 5.10 – Reflection of light coming along the
principal axis of a concave mirror
For free distribution
110
Physics
Geometrical Optics
(ii) Rays coming parallel to the principal
axis pass through the focal point
after being reflected by the concave
mirror.
F
Figure 5.11 – Reflection of light coming parallel to
the principal axis of a concave mirror
(iii) Rays coming towards a concave mirror
through the focal point are reflected
parallel to the principal axis.
P
F
C
Figure 5.12 – Reflection of light coming through
the focal point of a concave mirror
P
F
C
the
through
(iv) Rays coming towards a concave
center of
mirror
curvature are reflected back through
the center of curvature. The reason
for this is that any line drawn to the
surface of the mirror from the center
of curvature is perpendicular to the
surface of the mirror.
Figure 5.13 - Rays coming towards a concave
mirror through the center of
curvature
(v) Rays making a certain angle of incidence
with the principal axis are reflected back
with an equal angle of reflection. This
means, in figure 5.14, i = r.
P
a y
r
i n c
i d e n t
i
r
principal axis
reflected ray
Figure 5.14 – Reflection of a ray coming to
the mirror making some angle
with the principal axis
111
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
Note
^1& Rays coming along the principal axis, return along the principal axis after
reflection.
^2& A ray travelling parallel to the principal axis passes through the focal point
after reflection.
^3& A ray that passes through the centre of curvature of the mirror is reflected back
along its own path.
Images formed by concave mirrors
Observe your face through a plane mirror. The image seen in the mirror will be the
same size as your face.
Observe your face through a concave mirror
placed closer to the face than the focal length.
You will observe a very large image of your
face. In addition it will be an upright and virtual
image.
Figure 5.15 – A concave mirror shows
an enlarged image of your face
Let us do the activity 5.1 to find the focal length of the concave mirror.
Activity 5.1
Apparatus : concave mirror, white screen.
² Open the window of a room.
² Hold a concave mirror, turned towards the window as shown in figure 5.16.
² Hold a screen (or a white paper) in front of the concave mirror and adjust the
distance between the concave mirror and the screen until a clear image of the
scene outside the window is formed on the screen.
² Because this image is formed on the screen, it is a real image.
² Measure the distance between the mirror and the screen when you get a very
clear, up side down image on the screen.
Because the light rays coming from a far away object can be considered as parallel,
the distance from the mirror to the image can be considered to be approximately
equal to the focal length of the mirror.
For free distribution
112
Physics
Geometrical Optics
image
concave mirror
focal length
Figure 5.16 – Measuring the focal length of a concave mirror
Let us do the activity 5.2 to study the nature of the image formed by a concave
mirror using a candle and screen.
Activity 5.2
Fix a concave mirror on a stand and place it on a table.
Apparatus : concave mirror, white screen, candle.
²
² As in the activity 5.2 find the approximate focal length of the concave mirror.
² Keep a lighted candle on the table near the principal axis at a distance about
five times the focal length from the mirror.
² Hold a screen in front of the concave mirror and move the screen till a sharp
image of the flame is obtained.
² Now try to obtain the image on the screen while moving the candle towards the
²
mirror and placing it at different distances from it.
Is it possible to obtain an image on the screen when the candle is very close
to the mirror?
The position of the image, the nature of the image and the size of the image formed
by a concave mirror depend on the position of the object with respect to the mirror.
² Drawing ray diagrams for images formed by concave mirrors
The image of a point object placed in front of a mirror is formed at the point where
two or more light rays coming from that point meet (or at the point where the
extended light rays meet).
¾ To find the position of the image, it is necessary to consider rays coming from
the top and bottom of the object separately.
¾ If the bottom of the object is situated on the principal axis, all the rays coming
from the bottom travel along the principal axis. Therefore the image of the
bottom of the object is formed on the principal axis.
113
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
¾ Therefore, the image of a vertical object which is located on the principal axis
is formed on the principal axis.
Therefore, to draw the image of an object which is placed vertically on the principal
axis it is sufficient to draw the rays which are coming from the top of the object.
For this any two light rays mentioned under the note in pages 110,111 can be used.
The image of the top of the object is the point of intersection of these two rays.
A ray diagram can be used to find the nature of the image formed when an object is
placed at different distances from the mirror.
1. Object between the mirror and the focal point
When the object is positioned between the mirror and the focal point, the image
cannot be formed on a screen. This means that the image is not real. This image can
be seen by viewing through the mirror. Such images are known as virtual images.
In order to find the location of the image in this instance, consider two rays coming
from the top of the object. It would be convenient to choose one of these rays to be
parallel to the principal axis and the other to pass through the center of curvature
as shown in Figure 5.17. Drawing the ray parallel to the principal axis to return
through the focal point after reflection and the ray coming through the center of
curvature to return through the same path after reflection, the point of intersection
of these two rays can be found by extending the two rays an shown by dotted line.
This point is the position where the image of the top of the object is formed.
virtual image
object
I
P
FO
C
Figure 5.17-Formation of the image of an object placed between the mirror and the focal point
As shown in figure 5.17, for objects positioned between the focal point and the
mirror (pole of the mirror), the images are upright, virtual and larger than the object.
For free distribution
114
Physics
2. Object on the focal point
Geometrical Optics
The image of an object on the focal point must be formed at infinity. This can be
shown by considering the paths of two rays, as shown in figure 5.18. If we assume
that the two parallel rays meet at infinity, the image will be very large and inverted.
P
F
C
Figure 5.18 - Image of an object placed on the focal point
3. Object between the center of curvature and the focal point
For an object placed between the center of curvature and the focal point, it can be
shown that the image is real, inverted, larger than the object and is formed beyond
the centre of curvature, by considering a ray coming from the top of the object
parallel to the principal axis and another ray passing through the center of curvature.
The ray diagram for this case is shown in Figure 5.19.
object
F
C
image
P
Figure 5.19 - Image of an object placed between the center of curvature and the focal point
4. Object on the center of curvature
F
C
object
image
Figure 5.20 - Formation of the image of an object placed on the center of curvature
115
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
In order to find the position of the image for an object positioned at the center of
curvature, we can consider a ray coming from the top of the object through the focal
point and a ray coming parallel to the principal axis. As shown in Figure 5.20, the
ray that passed through the focal point returns parallel to the principal axis while
the ray that was parallel to the principal axis passes through the focal point after
reflection. It can be shown that these two rays intersect at a point directly below
the center of curvature and that the height of the image is equal to the height of the
object. This too is an inverted real image.
5. Object at a point beyond the center of curvature
In order to find the location of the image in this instance, consider two rays coming
from the top of the object. It would be convenient to choose one of these rays to be
parallel to the principal axis and the other to pass through the center of curvature
as shown in Figure 5.21. Drawing the ray parallel to the principal axis to return
through the focal point after reflection and the ray coming through the center of
curvature to return through the same path after reflection, the point of intersection
of these two rays can be found. This point is the position where the image of the top
of the object is formed. Here, the image is formed between C and F. This image is
smaller than the object, inverted and real.
F
C
object
image
Figure 5.21 - Formation of the image of an object placed at a point beyond the center of curvature
6. Object very far from the mirror
The image of an object placed very far from a concave mirror is formed on the focal
point of the mirror, on the same side of the mirror as the object, smaller than the
object and is inverted. Since this image can be seen on a screen, it is a real image.
For free distribution
116
Physics
Geometrical Optics
Table 5.1 - Images formed by concave mirror
Object distance
less than focal
length
Position of the
image
greater than
object distance
Real/
virtual
Upright/
inverted
virtual
upright
Image size
larger than
the object
focal length
infinity
greater than focal
length and less
than twice the
focal length
twice the focal
length
greater than twice
the focal length
greater than
twice the focal
length
twice the focal
length
greater than
focal length and
less than twice
the focal length
real
inverted
real
inverted
real
inverted
very far
at focal point
real
inverted
5.2.3 Reflection from a convex mirror
larger than
the object
same size as
the object
smaller than
the object
much smaller
than the object
F
C
F
C
(a) Light rays coming along the
(b) Light rays coming parallel
principal axis.
to the principal axis.
F
C
F
C
(c) Rays coming toward the
(d) Rays which are coming toward
focus.
the centre of curvature.
Figure 5.22 - Reflection of light from a convex mirror
117
For free distribution
Physics
Figure 5.22 shows how reflection of light occur from a convex mirror.
Geometrical Optics
• In a convex mirror too, rays coming towards the mirror along the principal axis
are reflected back along the same path after falling on the mirror (figure (a)).
• Rays coming parallel to the principal axis are reflected as a divergent beam after
falling on the mirror (figure (b)).
• These divergent rays appear to be coming from a single point on the principal axis
inside the mirror. This point is known as its focal point.
• A ray that comes toward the focal point is reflected back along a path parallel to
the principal axis (figure (c)).
• A ray that comes toward the centre of curvature of the mirror is reflected back
along its own path (figure (d)). This is because any straight line drawn from the
centre of curvature to the mirror surface is a normal to the surface.
Images formed by convex mirrors
Bring a convex mirror close to your face and observe the image formed in it. Image
is upright and smaller image of your face.
Let us do the activity 5.3 to study the nature of image formed by convex mirror.
Activity 5.3
Apparatus : a concave mirror, a screen, a candle.
Try to repeat activity 5.2 using a convex mirror instead of a concave mirror.
You will find that convex mirrors do not form real images.
To obtain an image from a convex mirror, you have to look at the object through
the convex mirror.
Regardless of the distance between an object and the mirror, you will always see an
upright, virtual image from a convex mirror.
Figure 5.23 shows how the image of an object placed in front of a convex mirror
is formed. Here too, the position of the image and its nature can be determined by
tracing the paths of two rays coming from the top of the object after reflection just
as was done with concave mirrors.
For free distribution
118
Physics
Geometrical Optics
object
virtual image
O
P
I
F
C
Figure 5.23 - Formation of an image from a convex mirror
5.3 Refraction of Light
Place a pencil inside a glass of water as shown in Figure
5.24 and view it from the top. You will see the pencil as
if it is bent.
x
z
The reason for this appearance is the bending of light rays
when they enter from one medium to another medium
with different optical properties. Light rays coming to
the eye from the part of the pencil inside the water travel
through water before reaching the eye through air. When
light rays enter air from water, the direction of the light
rays changes. However, the rays coming to the eye from
the part of the pencil above the water level do not change their direction as they
travel only through air before reaching the eye.
Figure 5.24 - A pencil inside
a glass of water
y
The bending of light rays upon entering one medium from another medium is
known as refraction of light.
Look at a coin at the bottom of a container with water. The coin will appear to be
slightly raised above the bottom level of the container. If the coin is in air, the rays
from the coin will reach the eye straight. But when the coin is in water, the rays
from the coin do not come to the eye straight. When they enter air from water, the
rays bend away from the normal to the surface as shown in Figure 5.25. Therefore,
the rays from the coin appear to come to the eye from a point slightly above the
actual position.
119
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
apparent
depth
air
real depth
Figure 5.25- Slightly raised appearance of an object at the bottom of a vessel of water
When a page of a book is viewed through a block of glass placed on it, the script on
the page seems to be raised up a little, also due to refraction.
A ray of light travelling in one medium bends upon entering a second medium as
described above only if the rays arrive from a direction other than at a 90o angle on the
surface separating the two media. The reason for refraction is the difference in the
speeds of light from one medium to another. Light travels at the speed of 3 × 108 ms-1.
When light enters another medium from a vacuum, the speed reduces to a lower value.
A medium with a lower speed of light compared to another medium is called a denser
medium. The medium with the higher speed of light is called a rare medium.
Extra knowledge
The speed of light in several different media are given below.
Medium
Air
Water
Glass
Perspex
Diamond
Speed (km s-1)
300 000
225 000
197 000
201 000
124 000
In order to investigate how light is refracted in entering a block of glass from air
and when entering from glass back to air let us engage in the following activity.
For free distribution
120
Physics
Activity 5.4
Geometrical Optics
²
Place a piece of white paper on a
drawing board and place a block of
glass on it. Next, mark the edges of
the block of glass with a pencil. In
Figure 5.26, the position of the block
of glass is marked as PQRS.
² Now place one pin (A) vertically at a
short distance away from the surface
PQ and another pin (B) in contact with
the surface.
² Next, view the pins through the surface
A
P
S
X
i
Y
B
r
air
air
glass
M
r
N
C
e
Q
R
D
Figure 5.26 - Light refraction through a
block of glass
SR and place pin C in contact with the surface SR so as to be collinear with A
and B and thereafter place pin D at some distance away from the surface so
that all four pins appear to lie on the same line.
² Now remove the block of glass and the pins and draw lines AB, BC and CD
connecting the points where the pins were placed. Draw also the normal lines
to the surface PQ at point B and to the surface SR at point C. You will obtain
a diagram like the one shown in Figure 5.26.
In this diagram, ABCD is the path of a ray travelling across the block of glass
which entered the glass medium from air along the line AB. Since AB is the ray that
was incident on the block of glass, it is known as the incident ray.
XY is the normal drawn to the glass surface at the point of incidence. The angle
between the incident ray and the normal is known as the angle of incidence (i).
After entering the block of glass, the incident ray travels along BC. The refracted
ray (BC) is bent towards the normal at point B.
The angle between the ray of refraction and the normal is known as the angle of
refraction (r). This refracted ray travels back into air from glass at point C. This
means that the ray has emerged back into air. Therefore the ray CD is known as the
emergent ray. The angle between the transmitted ray and the normal drawn to the
glass surface at the point of emergence C is known as the angle of emergence (e).
When light enters from air which is a rare medium to glass which is a dense medium,
you will notice that the light rays are refracted towards the normal.
121
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
When light enters from glass which is a dense medium to air again, which is a rare
medium, the light rays are refracted away from the normal. From this activity you
will observe that a light ray entering a dense medium from a rare medium refracts
towards the normal while a light ray entering a rare medium from a dense medium
refracts away from the normal.
Refraction of light from dense medium to
rare medium.
Refraction of light from rare medium
to dense medium.
r
i
rare
dense
r
i
dense
rare
When a light ray travels from one medium to another medium if it bend towards
the normal, the second medium is denser compared to the first medium. If the ray
bends away from the normal, the second medium is a rare medium, compared to
the first medium.
5.3.1 Laws of refraction
There are two laws of refraction.
First law
The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the surface drawn at the point
of incidence lie on the same plane.
Second law
When light refracts from one medium to another medium, the ratio of the sine of
the incident angle to the sine of the refracted angle is a constant that depends only
on the two media. This constant is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first medium.
The second law above is also called Snell's law.
Index of refraction ^n& =
sin i
sine of the incident angle =
sine of the refracted angle sin r
For a light ray that travels from air to glass, the refractive index is written as ang .
For free distribution
122
Physics
For rays that enter from glass to air, the refractive index is written as gna.
Geometrical Optics
refractive index of water relative to air anw = 1'33
refractive index of glass relative to air ang = 1'5
The refractive index defined above is the refractive index of one medium relative to
another medium. Therefore, it depends on both media. If we use a vacuum instead
of the first medium (if we consider a light ray entering from a vacuum to some
medium), then the refractive index depends only on one medium. This is normally
referred to as the refractive index of that medium.
For example, refractive index of water is the ratio of the sine of the incident angle
to the sine of the refracted angle when a light ray travels from a vacuum to water.
Because the velocity of light in air is only slightly different from that in a vacuum,
and because it is practically difficult to make measurements of refractive index
relative to a vacuum, often the refractive index of a medium relative to air is used as
the refractive index of that medium. There are no units for the index of refraction.
5.3.2 Total Internal Reflection and Critical Angle
When a light ray travels from a dense medium to a rare medium, it bends away from
the normal, as shown in Figure 5.27.
air
water
Figure 5.27 – A light ray traveling from water to air
When the incident angle inside the dense medium is gradually increased, the
refracted ray bends further away from the normal. At a certain value of the incident
angle, the refracted ray travels along the interface between the two media, as shown
in Figure 5.28. In this case, the angle of refraction is 90o. The incident angle inside
the denser medium when this happens is called the critical angle.
123
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
air
water
C
critical
angle
Figure 5.28 – Critical angle
If the incident angle is further increased, the incident light ray will be reflected back
into the dense medium as shown in Figure 5.29. This reflecting back into the same
medium is called total internal reflection.
air
water
i
r
i > c
Fig. 5.29 – Total internal reflection
Extra knowledge
The table below shows the critical angle for a few different materials.
Material
critical angle
water
49Ÿ
glass
42Ÿ
diamond
24Ÿ
² Several applications of total internal reflection
Optical fibers
An optical fibre is a flexible transparent fiber made of glass or plastic. Light rays that
enter through one end of an optical fiber travel through the fiber while undergoing
total internal reflection and leave the fiber through the other end. Even if the fiber
is many kilometers long, light will leave it without a significant loss of intensity.
The instrument called endoscope, which is used to observe the internal organs of
the human body, makes use of optical fibers. Optical fibers are now widely used
in telephone communication and in Internet connections. They are also used in
decorations.
For free distribution
124
Physics
Geometrical Optics
light entering the fiber
Endoscope
light entering
the fiber
light leaving
the fiber
Endoscope
an optical fiber
Total internal reflection by prisms
A prism with one angle 90 degrees and the other two angles 45 degrees each can be
used to produce total internal reflection. Such prisms are used in cameras, telescopes
and binoculars. The critical angle of glass is 43 degrees. Therefore, if the incident
angle inside glass is greater than 43 degrees, a light ray will undergo total internal
refraction.
Figure 5.30 shows a light ray entering one face of a prism perpendicular to the
surface. This ray is not refracted at that surface. Next if falls on the second face of
the prism with an incident angle of 45 degrees. Because this incident angle is greater
than the critical angle in glass, the light ray undergoes total internal reflection and
travels perpendicular to the third face of the prism. The ray emerges from this face
without bending. This technique allows us to bend a light ray by an angle of 90
degrees
45o
45o
45o
45o
Figure 5.30 – Total internal reflection by a prism
125
For free distribution
Geometrical Optics
Physics
5.1 Exercise
^1& The figure shows a man holding a
fishing rod.
(i) The fish appears to the man
at a slightly higher position.
What is the reason for this?
(ii) Draw a ray diagram to show
how the position appears to be
raised.
5.4 Lenses
A lens is an optical device with curved surfaces, made of glass, plastic or any other
transparent material. A lens alters the path of light rays that pass through it by
refraction. Images on the retina of our eye are formed by a lens.
Lenses are used in telescopes and binoculars, which are instruments that help us see
far away objects clearly. Lenses are also used in the microscope – the instrument
that allows us to see very small objects that are not visible to the naked eye. The
magnifying glass or the simple microscope that magnifies small objects is also a
lens.
Figure 5.31 - Some instruments with lenses
Many lenses are made of glass. But now plastic is increasingly used for making
lenses. Any transparent material can be used to make lenses. Sometimes even
liquids such as water are used to make lenses.
Figure 5.32 shows several types of lenses. Lenses with two convex surfaces are called
bi-convex lenses. When a lens has one convex surface and the other plane, it is called
a plano-convex lens. In a bi-concave lens, both surfaces are concave while a lens
with a concave surface and plane surface is called a plano-concave lens.
For free distribution
126
Physics
Geometrical Optics
bi-convex plano-convex bi-concave plano-concave
Figure 5.32 – Several types of lenses.
5.4.1 Convex lenses
The two surfaces of a convex lens can be considered as parts of two imaginary
spherical surfaces, as shown in Figure 5.33.
C1
C2
principal axis
A
B
Figure 5.33 - Surfaces of a convex lens
In Figure 5.33 one surface of the convex lens is
denoted as A and the other as B. The centre of
the sphere that forms the surface A is denoted
as C2 and the centre of the sphere that forms
the surface B is denoted as C1. The line that
joins these two centres C1 and C2 is called the
principal axis of the lens. At the points where
the principal axis intersects with the surfaces
of the lens, the principal axis is perpendicular
to the surfaces. Therefore, a light ray that enters
the lens along the principal axis will leave the
lens without bending. The mid point between the two surfaces of the lens is called the
optical centre of the lens. It is possible to show that any light ray that travels through
the optical centre passes through the lens without any bending, as shown
in figure 5.34.
optical centre
Figure 5.34 – Light rays traveling through
the optical centre
127
For free distribution
Physics
Activity 5.5
²
When there is bright Sun light, hold a
convex lens to Sun light as shown in figure
5.35 and place a white paper in front.
Adjust the distance between the paper and
the lens until you get a very small patch of
light on the paper.
² Because the Sun is very far from us, we
can consider all rays of light coming from
the Sun to be parallel. In this activity you
will observe that, when parallel light from
the Sun passes through the lens, all of the
rays are focused to a single point.
Geometrical Optics
convex lens
paper
Figure 5.35 – Focusing of light
with a convex lens
What will happen to the light rays travelling parallel to the principal axis of a convex
lens? After refracting from the lens, they bend towards the principal axis (converge)
and travel through a single point on the principal axis. This point is called the focus
or the focal point of the lens.
focal point
C
F
f
Figure 5.36 – The way the rays parallel to the principal axis are refracted by a convex lens
In order to understand how the light rays entering a convex lens parallel to the
principal axis, refract when they go through the lens, let us look at figure 5.36.
The broken lines in this figure are normals drawn to the lens surface at each point
where a light ray crosses the surface.
• When such a ray enters the lens, they enter a denser medium from a rarer medium.
• Then this ray bends towards the normal to the surface. When this ray leaves the
lens, it enters a rarer medium from a denser medium. Therefore, it bends away
from the normal.
• According to figure 5.36, in both cases the light ray bends towards the principal axis.
• It is possible to show that all rays that enter the lens parallel to the principal axis,
after bending as discussed above travel through a single point on the principal axis.
For free distribution
128
Physics
Geometrical Optics
• This point is called the focus or the focal point of the lens. The distance from the
optical centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length of the lens.
Because light can enter from either side of the lens, it is possible to identify two
focal points for a lens. Both these points have the same distance to the optical centre
of the lens. Normally, when ray diagrams are drawn, the focal point is denoted as
F and the focal length is denoted by f.
²
Images formed by convex lenses
Activity 5.6
² Open the window of a room.
² Hold a convex lens, turned towards the window.
² On the opposite side of the lens, hold a screen (or a white paper) and adjust the
distance between the lens and the screen until a clear image of the scene outside the
window is formed on the screen.
² Measure the distance between the lens and the screen when you get a very
clear, up side down image on the screen.
focal length
clear, inverted
image of the
window
This distance you measure will be the focal length of the lens.
The image in the above activity is formed when light rays coming from objects
outside the window are refracted by the lens and come together on the screen.
Because this image is formed by light rays that actually reach the screen, it is a real
image.
² Drawing ray diagrams for images formed by convex lenses
The size, nature and position of the images formed by convex lenses depends on the
distance between the lens and the object.
In drawing ray diagrams for images formed by convex lenses, it is convenient to
use the specific rays shown in figure 5.37.A light ray passing through the optical
129
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
axis is shown in figure 5.37 (a), This type of rays pass through the lens straight,
without any refraction. A ray that enters a lens parallel to the principal axis, as
shown in figure 5.37 (b), passes through the focal point after emerging from the
lens. A light ray that passes through the focal point on one side of the lens, as shown
in figure 5.37 (c) emerges parallel to the principal axis after refracting by the lens.
C
(a)
C
F
F
C
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.37 – A few special rays used in drawing ray diagrams
1. When the object is between the lens and its focal point
P
I
F
O
C
F
Figure 5.38 – When the object is between the lens and its focal point
Figure 5.38 shows an object placed at point O which is between the lens and the
focal point F. A light ray coming from the top of the object and traveling parallel to
the principal axis will go through the focal point F on the opposite side of the lens.
Another ray coming from the top of the object and traveling through the optical axis
C will go straight without any refraction. When these two rays are extended in the
opposite direction, they will intersect at a point P. The top of the image will be at this
point. Because the object is vertical, the image should also be vertical. Therefore,
the image must be on the vertical line drawn to the principal axis from point P. This
image is larger than the object and it is up right. This image can be seen when the
eye is placed as shown in the figure. However, because the rays do not actually meet
at point P, this image cannot be formed on a screen. Therefore, it is a virtual image.
2. When the object is on the focal point
Figure 5.39 shows a ray diagram for an image of an object places at the focal
point of a convex lens. A light ray coming parallel to the principal axis, after going
For free distribution
130
Physics
Geometrical Optics
through the lens, travels through the focal point. A ray that goes through the optical
centre (C) travels directly, without any refraction. Both these rays, when reaching
the eye travel as parallel rays. Therefore, the image formed is at infinity. This image
is larger than the object.
F
C
F
Figure 5.39 – Ray diagram for an image of an object on the focal point of a lens
3. When the object is between the focal length and twice the focal
length
When the object is at a distance between f and 2f, the image is formed on the
opposite side of the lens at a distance greater than 2f. As shown in figure 5.40, this
image is a magnified inverted real image.
object
F'
F
C
F
F'
I
f
f
f
f
Figure 5.40 – The image of an object placed between distances f and 2f
image
4. When the object distance is equal to twice the focal length
The image formed in this case is at a distance 2f on the other side of the lens. The
height of the image is equal to that of the object. It is a real, up side down image.
The ray diagram is shown in figure 5.41
F'
F
C
F
I
f
f
f
f
Figure 5.41 - Image of an object when the object distance is 2f
131
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
5. When the object distance is greater than twice the focal length
F'
F
C
F
I
f
f
f
f
Figure 5.42 - Image of an object placed at a distance greater than 2f
In this case, the image is formed on the opposite side of the lens, at a point between
the focal length (f) and twice the focal length (2f). This image is diminished, real
and up side down. The ray diagram is shown in figure 5.42.
The image becomes smaller as the object distance increases.
² The following table shows how images are formed by a biconvex lens. at dif-
ferent object distances.
Table 5.2 - Images formed by convex lens
Object
distance
Position of the
image
Real/
Virtual
Upright/
inverted
Size of the image
less than focal
length
focal length
greater than focal
length and less
than twice the
focal length
twice the focal
length
greater than
twice the focal
length
greater than object
distance, on the
same side as the
object
infinity
virtual
upright
larger than the object
the
focal
on
greater than twice
the focal length,
on
the opposite
side
twice
length,
opposite side
greater than focal
less
length and
than
the
twice
focal length, on
opposite side
real
inverted
larger than the object
real
inverted
same size as the
object
real
inverted
smaller than the
object
infinite
at focal point on
the opposite side
real
inverted
much smaller than
the object
For free distribution
132
Physics
5.4.2 Concave Lenses
Geometrical Optics
Figure 5.43 shows how the surfaces of a concave lens can be understood as parts
of spheres.
C2
A
B
C1
Figure 5.43 – Surfaces of a concave lens
The centre of the sphere that forms surface A is C2 and the centre of the sphere
that forms surface B is C1. The line that joins these two centre points is called the
principal axis of the lens. In both convex lenses and concave lenses, a light ray that
travels through the principal axis passes through the lens without bending.
The centre point of the lens, labeled as C is called the optical centre. Any light ray
that goes through the optical centre travels straight, without bending.
Next we have to consider light rays that enter a concave lens parallel to the principal
axis. Such rays, as shown in figure 5.44, are refracted away from the principal axis
after passing through the lens. That means they diverge. The point from which these
divergent rays appear to come from is called the focal point of that lens.
focal point
F
C
principal axis
Figure 5.44 – Rays parallel to the principal axis, after passing through a concave lens, appear to
come from a single point
Images formed by concave lenses
²
In order to understand images formed by concave lenses, let us do activity 5.7.
Activity 5.7
Place a bright object (eg: a lighted candle) in front of a concave lens.
²
² On the other side of the lens, place a screen and try to obtain a real image on
the screen by suitably adjusting the lens.
133
For free distribution
F
O
Physics
Geometrical Optics
You will find that concave lenses do not form real images. To obtain an image from
a concave lens, you have to look at the object through the lens. Then you will see
an image smaller than the object. This is a virtual image. Whatever the distance
between the lens and the object, what you see will be an upright, diminished virtual
image. Figure 5.45 shows a ray diagram for an image formed by a concave lens.
Figure 5.45 - A ray diagram for an image formed by a concave lens
5.4.3 Hand Lens or Simple Microscope
A convex lens makes an object look bigger when the object is placed in front of
the lens at a distance less than the focal length of the lens. This property of convex
lenses is used to view magnified images of objects.
A convex lens fitted with a handle is called a hand lens or a simple microscope. It
is also commonly known as a magnifying lens. Figure 5.46 shows the ray diagram
for a magnified lens. Magnifying glasses are commonly used for viewing small
insects, parts of flowers etc.
(I)
image
(O)
object
F
C
F
Figure 5.46 – A ray diagram for a simple microscope
² The Principle of reversibility of light
If the direction of a light ray is reversed, it will follow exactly the same path
backward. This is called the principle of reversibility of light. This principle is
valid even if the light ray is subjected to a combination of many reflections and
refractions.
For free distribution
134
Physics
Geometrical Optics
For your knowledge
²
object
In cameras, images
are formed on a
film using convex
lenses. When one
adjusts the lens, the
between
distance
the screen and the
lens changes. Clear
images of objects at
different distances
can be obtained on the screen this way.
F
convex lens
film
real, inverted
image
² The complex microscope is used to observe tiny objects which are not visible
to the naked eye. It has two lenses called objective and eye piece. This
combination of lenses produce a very high magnification.
object
virtual image
135
For free distribution
Physics
5.2 Exercise
Geometrical Optics
(1) (i) Name two types of mirrors that always produce virtual images.
(ii) Answer the following questions regarding the image formed when an
object is placed between the mirror and the focal point of a concave mirror.
(a) Is the image upright or inverted?
(b) Is the image larger than the object or smaller than the object?
(c) Is the image real, or virtual?
(d) When the object is moved toward the pole of the mirror, will the image
become smaller or larger?
(iii) At what object distance do you get the largest image from a concave mirror?
Is that image upright or inverted?
(iv) Place an object in front of a convex lens at different positions and observe
the image in each case. Write two properties common to all those images.
(2) (i) What is meant by the term refraction of light?
(ii) Draw ray diagrams to show how refraction occurs when light enters
(a) a dense medium from a rare medium,
(b) a rare medium from a dense medium.
(iii) Name the rays and the angles of the following ray diagram.
A
X
B
Y
M
C
D
N
AB ray
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
BC ray '''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
CD ray
ABX angle '''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
YBC angle
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
NCD angle
For free distribution
136
Physics
Geometrical Optics
(3) The figure shows different light rays entering a rare medium from a dense
medium.
air
water
normal
air
water
air
water
critical
angle
greater than
critical angle
(i) Copy these figures and complete the ray diagrams.
(ii) What is meant by the term total internal reflection?
(iii) Give an example for a situation where total internal reflection occurs.
(4) Draw a ray diagram to show how an image is formed when an object is placed
in front of a convex lens, at a distance greater than twice the focal length.
(a) Is that image real or virtual?
(b) Describe a simple activity to find out whether the image is real virtual.
(c) Is that image smaller or larger than the object?
(5) (i) The figure shows a light ray entering an optical fibre.
B
A
air
optical fibre
(a) Draw a ray diagram to show what happens to that ray inside the optical
fibre.
(b) State what changes occur to the speed of the ray as it follows this path
from the source. Calculations are not required.
(ii) (a) At what object distance do you get the largest real image when an
object is placed in front of a convex lens?
(b) Write down two other properties of that image.
(c) At what object distance do you get the smallest real image when an
object is placed in front of a convex lens?
137
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
(6) A bag contains lenses with focal lengths 10 cm, 20 cm and 25 cm which are
not marked with their focal length. Describe a simple activity to identify the
three types lenses.
(7) (a) Light changes direction when it passes from air to water.
(i) Give the name of the process that produces this change of direction.
(ii) Explain why this change of direction occurs.
(b) The diagram shows some fish under water and a butterfly above water.
A
B
(i) Draw a ray to show the path of a light ray travelling from the butterfly
to the eye of fish B.
(ii) Explain what critical angle is.
(iii) Explain how rays from fish A could reach the eye of fish B through two
different paths. Draw rays in the diagram to show these two paths.
(8) A student carries out an experiment to investigate the refraction of light as it
passes from glass into air. He shines a ray of light through a glass block and
into the air as shown.
air
glass
X
(a) Complete this diagram and show the angle of incidence i and the angle of
refraction r . Measure these two angles.
i = .........................................
r = .........................................
For free distribution
138
Physics
Geometrical Optics
(b) The student increases the angle of incidence and notices that, above a
certain angle, the light no longer passes into air. Explain this observation.
(9) The figure shows a light signal travelling through an optical fibre made of glass.
P
B
glass fibre
(a) State two changes light when it enters the fibre from air at point B.
(b) Explain why the light ray, after hitting point P, travels along the path shown.
(10) Lenses are used in many optical devices.
(a) Complete the table below by writing information about the images formed
by each optical device.
optical device
eye
projector
magnifying
glass
nature of image
real
size of image position of image
magnified
further from lens
than the object
(b) The figure shows an object placed in front of a convex lens, at a distance
less than its focal length.
(i) Complete the ray diagram
and draw the image formed.
(ii) Use your ray diagram to
describe three properties of
the image.
lens
object
F
eye
F
139
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
(11) The figure shows an object OB in front of a convex lens. The two focal
points are marked as F and F'. An image of OB will be formed on the right
of the lens.
lens
B
O
F
F
(a) Draw two rays from the top of the object (B), that pass through the lens and
reach the image.
(b) Draw the image formed and label it as I.
(c) Calculate the ratio of the image size to the object size.
(12) The diagram shows a convex lens forming a real image of an object.
object
2F
F
F
2F
image
State two changes that occur to the image when the object is moved towards F.
(13) The diagram shows an object placed at O, in front of a convex lens. Focal
length of the lens is 30 mm O is 20 mm from centre of lens and the object is
15 mm high.
(a) By drawing this diagram to a suitable scale
find the position of the image.
(b) State two properties of the image.
(c) By measuring the heights of the image and the
object, find the ratio of their heights.
F
O
F
For free distribution
140
Physics
Summary
Geometrical Optics
² There are two types of mirrors - plane mirrors and curved mirrors. Curved
mirrors can be either convex mirrors or concave mirrors.
²
Images formed by plane mirrors are virtual and upright. They are the same
size as the object.
² The incident ray, the reflected ray and the normal to the surface at the point
of reflection lie on the same plane.
² When light is reflected from a mirror, the angle of incidence is equal to the
angle of reflection.
² When an object is placed in front of a convex lens, the images are
diminished, upright and virtual, irrespective of the object distance
² The bending of light when passing from one medium to another is called
refraction of light
² When light travels from a rare medium to a dense medium, the ray bends
towards the normal.
² When light travels from a dense medium to a rare medium, the ray bends
away from the normal.
² When light undergoes refraction, the incident ray, the refracted ray and the
normal to the surface at the point of refraction lie on the same plane.
Sine of the angle of incidence
Index of refraction
=
²
² When light travels from a denser medium to a rare medium, at a certain
Sine of the angle of refraction
value of the angle of incidence, the refracted ray travels along the surface
between the two media. The angle of incidence in this situation is called the
critical angle (c).
² When a ray of light travels from a denser medium to a rare medium with an
angle of incidence greater than the critical angle, the ray is reflected back
into the denser medium. This is called total internal reflection.
² Light travels through optical fibers by undergoing total internal reflection.
² There are many types of lenses such as bi-convex lenses, bi-concave lenses,
plano-convex lenses, and plano-concave lenses.
² When an object is placed in front of a bi-convex lens, the image is upright,
diminished and virtual, irrespective of the object distance.
141
For free distribution
Physics
Geometrical Optics
Glossary
Reflection
Total internal reflection
- mrdj¾;kh
- mQ¾K wNHka;r mrdj¾;kh
- öuÔ¨¦
- •ÊAPöuÔ¨¦
Mirrors
Apparent depth
Binoculars
Focal
Incident ray
- o¾mK
- oDYH .eUqr
- fofk;sh
- kdNsh
- m;k lsrKh
Angle of incidence
- m;k fldaKh
Refraction
- j¾;kh
Refractive index
- j¾;kdxlh
Refracted
- j¾;s;
Angle of refraction
- j¾;s; fldaKh
Convex lens
Concave lens
- W;a;, ldph
- wj;, ldph
Convex mirror
- W;a;, o¾mKh
Concave mirror
- wj;, o¾mKh
- BiPÒ
- ÷uõØÓ BÇ®
- A›¯ C¸ÂÈ¯ß
- SÂÄ
- £kPvº
- £k÷Põn®
- •ÔÄ
- •ÔÄa _mi
- •ÔÁøhuÀ
- •ÔÄU ÷Põn®
- SÂÄ ÂÀø»PÒ
- SÈÄ ÂÀø»PÒ
- SÂÄ Bi
- SÈÄ Bi
Real image
Virtual image
- ;d;aúl m%;sìïnh
- Esø© Â®£®
- w;d;aúl m%;sìïnh
- ©õ¯ Â®£®
For free distribution
142
Human body processes
Biology
Biological processes in
human body
06
Many different biological processes take place in the human body. We will discuss
about those processes and the systems specialized to perform them.
6.1 Process of food Digestion
Energy is required for different biological processes that take place in human
body. Energy is obtained through food that we take into the body. These food
contain nutrients such as carbohydrates, lipids and proteins. Carbohydrates, lipids
and proteins are complex organic molecules that do not dissolve in water. These
compounds cannot be absorbed into the human body. Therefore they should be
broken down into small particles.
The process by which the complex organic compounds are converted into
simple organic products to be absorbed into the human body is called digestion
of food.
Food digestion takes place in two process namely mechanical and chemical
processes
During mechanical process the physical nature of the food is altered,
E.g. :- Breaking down of food into small pieces by teeth inside mouth.
During chemical process, the insoluble complex compounds are broken down into
simple molecules by the action of enzymes.
E.g. :- Starch is converted into maltose by salivary amylase (ptyalin) enzyme
inside mouth.
There are some nutrients, that can be used by the body without any digestion, such
as mineral salts, some vitamins, glucose, fructose and galactose.
The organs involved in food digestion, are collectively called as digestive system.
Human digestive system
Human digestive system is a single tube, that runs from mouth to anus. According
to the requirement, the structure has changed at different places, and the glands
(salivary glands, pancreas, liver) that supply enzymes and other substances (bile)
connect at different sites. The functions take place in the digestive system are food
digestion, absorption of digested end products and removal of undigested
materials from the body.
143
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Let us see the structures that belong to the digestive tract.
Buccal cavity
Salivary glands
Epiglottis
Oesophagus
Diaphragm
Stomach
Pancreas
Small intestine
Liver
Gall bladder
Large intestine
Caecum
Appendix
Rectum
Anus
Figure. 6.1 - Human digestive system
Figure. 6.1 - Human digestive system
Assignment - 6'1
y
y
Identify the parts of the human digestive
tract in the human torso
Concern about the nature, size and
location of those parts
Figure. 6.2 - Human torso
For free distribution
144
Human body processes
Biology
Let us observe the changes that occur in food at first part of the digestive tract, the
buccal cavity.
Digestion in the buccal cavity
Mouth opens the buccal cavity to the environment. It is surrounded by muscular
lips at the bottom and top. The buccal cavity is made up of upper and lower jaws.
Only the lower jaw can be moved. Teeth are present in both jaws. Buccal cavity
is surrounded by cheeks. The tongue is attached to the floor of the buccal cavity.
Three salivary glands are present in the buccal cavity. They secrete saliva and the
tongue helps in identification of taste, mixing of food with saliva and swallowing.
A sweet taste is sensed when chewing rice or bread for sometime. Let's discuss why
it is sweet?
The salivary amylase (ptyalin) enzyme, acts on starch in digestion of food. Starch
will be partially digested into maltose. Digestion of food starts in the mouth.
Starch
salivary amylase
Maltose
When rice or bread is chewed for sometime starch is digested into maltose. As
maltose is sweet, we sense the sweet taste.
Initially digested food is formed into a bolus and pushed to the posterior part of the
buccal cavity. Next food is pushed into the pharynx.
Pharynx is a common area to both respiratory and digestive systems.
There is a movable organ called epiglottis found just above the opening of trachea.
When bolus is swallowed the epiglottis moves down to close the opening of trachea.
Then bolus enters into oesophagus without entering into trachea.
Nasal cavity
Epiglottis
Buccal cavity
Pharynx
Epiglottis
Food bolus
Oesophagus
Trachea
Figure. 6.3 - Trachea is closed with epiglottis when food enter into oesophagus
145
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Epiglottis helps to prevent entering food into the trachea. When food enters to
pharynx, respiratory track is blocked by epiglottis. This prolong blockage of trachea
may cause death. If the food is not removed instantly, the person may die due to
blockage of respiratory tract.
Oesophagus is a constricted tube. How is food moved along a constricted tube?
The bolus passes through the oesophagus
by peristaltic movements. As oesophagus
is a muscular
to
contractions and relaxations of its wall
the peristaltic movements appear as
waves. These peristaltic movements
provide the force to propel the bolus
forward.
structure, due
Figure. 6.4 -How the food pass through
oesophagus
Then food is moved into stomach by peristaltic movements.
Digestion in the stomach
The stomach is a dilated sac like organ. Due to the peristaltic activity of muscles in
the stomach wall the bolus is broken down and mixed well into a chyme. Several
secretions ooze out into the stomach. It is collectively called the gastric juice.
The gastric juice contains mainly hydrochloric acid (HCl) and pepsin enzyme. HCl
activates pepsin and pepsin starts the protein digestion to produce polypeptides.
Renin present in infants causes coagulation of milk. Food retain in stomach for
about three hours. Although the digested end products are not absorbed but some
water, glucose and some drugs may absorb.
Chyme containing partially digested proteins, digested and undigested carbohydrates,
undigested lipids, water, minerals and vitamins are released into the proximal part
of small intestine, duodenum part by part.
When the stomach is empty, it continues to contract. When the stomach is empty
for a longer period of time, the rate of contraction is also high. So it causes a pain.
It gives a sense about hunger. Hunger is a signal that indicates the need of food.
Digestion in the small intestine
The chemical digestion of food mainly takes place in the small intestine. Pancreatic
enzymes as well as intestinal enzymes involve in this digestion.
The small intestine is about 7 m in length. The proximal part of the small intestine
is C shaped and known as duodenum. The duct of the pancreas and the gall bladder
opens into the duodenum via a single pore. Pancreatic juice is secreted into the
For free distribution
146
Human body processes
Biology
duodenum through pancreatic duct. It contains three main enzymes. They are
trypsin, amylase and lipase. The bile carried through the bile duct is added to it.
Bile is produced in the liver and stored in the gall bladder.
Bile contains bile pigments, bile salts, bicarbonate ions and water.
Due to mixing of bile with food at duodenum, the lipids in food are broken down
into small droplets by the process called emulsification. Due to this action, enzymes
get a greater surface area to act on lipid food.
Intestinal juice secreted by the wall of the intestine contains, maltase, sucrase,
lactase, peptidase and mucus. Mucus lubricates food and then ease the passage of
food materials along the gut. It protects the inner lining of gut wall. Proteins present
in wall of stomach and intestine is protected by the protein digestive enzymes as
there is a layer of mucus on the wall.
Let us summarize food digestion takes place in small intestine (See table 6.1)
Organ
Pancreas
Small
intestine
Table 6.1 - Enzymes in food digestion in small intestine
Substrate/food
Protein
Polypeptides
Enzyme
Trypsin
End products
Amylase
Starch
Maltose
Lipase
Maltase
Sucrase
Lactase
Lipids
Maltose
Sucrose
Lactose
Fatty acids and glycerol
Glucose
Glucose and Fructose
Glucose and galactose
Peptidase
Polypeptides
Amino acids
These are the end products of digestion
Carbohydrates
Monosaccharides (Glucose $ Fructose / Galactose)
Protein
Lipids
Amino acids
Fatty acids ¬ Glycerol
What happens to the end products of food digestion?
The absorption of digested end products into body takes place mainly in the small
intestine. The small intestine is adapted to increase its efficiency of absorption in
different ways.
147
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
y Being a long tube
y
Presence of circular folds in the inner wall
y
Presence of finger like projections called villi in the circular folds
y
Presence of microvilli in the epithelial cells of villi
y
Thin epithelial lining on villi
y Villi are highly vascularised
Blood capillaries
Epidermal cells
Micro villi
Lacteal
Figure. 6.5 - Structure of villi in small intestine
The digestive end products given below are absorbed into the blood capillaries of
villi.
y Amino acids
y Vitamins
y Mineral salts
y Monosaccharides (Glucose/ Galactose/ Fructose)
Fatty acids and glycerol formed by digestion of lipids are absorbed into lacteals.
Finally they enter into blood circulatory system. When there is high amount of
glucose in blood, they are converted into glycogen and stored in liver. In the same
way when the concentration of glucose is decreased, glycogen breaks down to form
glucose and is added to blood. The unabsorbed materials in small intestine are sent
to the large intestine.
Processes in the large intestine
Length of the large intestine is about 1.5 m. It starts with caecum and ends up at
anus. The dilated part of the large intestine is the rectum. The opening of it, is the
anus. The materials entering into the large intestine contain a very small amount
of nutrients. Mainly it contains undigested cellulose and water. A small blind ended
tubular structure starts at the end of the caecum. It is known as the appendix. It is
very small in humans and it may be infected and become swollen. This disease is
known as appendicitis.
For free distribution
148
Human body processes
Biology
The main function of the large intestine is to absorb water from matter received from
ileum. Thereby making it into semi solid. The matter enterd into large intestine is
known as faecal matter. Faecal matter is yellow in colour due to bile pigments in it.
Undigested food, microorganisms, epithelial cells and mucus are present in faecal
matter.
When large intestine fills with faecal matter, it passes out from the rectum.
The diseases and disorders associated with digestive system
The chance of getting infections to the digestive tract is high as materials are entered
into it from outside frequently. Therefore digestive tract catches many diseases and
disorders.
Engage in the assignment 6.2 to get knowledge about the diseases and disorders
associated with digestive system.
Assignment - 6'2
Prepare a booklet about the diseases and disorders associated with digestive
tract and how to prevent them. Discuss with doctors and refer news papers,
magazines for information.
Gastritis
Inflammation of inner lining of mucosa of stomach is known as gastritis. It is a
common disease among people. Generally known as acidity. The symptoms are,
regurgitation of acid to mouth, burning feeling and pain in stomach. When the
condition becomes worse, ulcers appear in stomach and duodenal wall. Bleeding
can take place.
The reasons for this disorder are as follows,
Skipping of meals
”
” Consumption of acidic and spicy food
”
” Mental stress
Excessive smoking and alcohol consumption
By following healthy food diets and good habits one can avoid the above disease.
Constipation
Difficulty in defaecation due to hardening of faecal matter is known as constipation.
Faeces remain in the large intestine for a longer period of time and absorption of
water takes place excessively, Thereby this condition may occur.
Reasons for constipation are as follows,
y Consumption of food with low dietary fibres
y Not taking required volume of water
y Postponing of defaecation
149
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
By avoiding above conditions and habits one can avoid this disease. Some drugs
may cause constipation. Due to forceful defaecation, the anal canal may damage
and bleeding can occur. Due to constant constipation, haemorrhage may occur.
Typhoid
Typhoid is caused by a bacterium. The pathogen is transmitted through food and
water. The bacterium can enter into the body through mouth while swimming and
bathing in contaminated water. It may enter into the body through faecal matter
of patient, consumption of contaminated food and flies. Pain in arms and legs,
headache and fever are main symptoms. It is a disease which gradually becomes
worse. At initial stages constipation can occur. Tongue is covered by a plaque.
After sometime stomachache and diarrhoea can occur. Ulcers can form in the small
intestine and cause bleeding. Therefore blood is released with faecal matter. Due to
ulcers, the wall can be damaged. Disease can be identified by a blood test or stool
test. Typhoid can be prevented by getting a vaccine.
Diarrhoea
Diarrhoea occurs when the intestines are infected with a virus, bacteria or a parasite.
This disease is transmitted by the faeces of an infected person. The main symptom
is release of faecal matter in liquid state. Absorption of water in the large intestine
will not occur properly. Dehydration may occur due to loss of fluid. If dehydration
becomes worse due to diarrhoea, it may be fatal. So it is needed to consume more
water and consult a doctor immediately.
The above two diseases can be avoided by taking preventive measures given below
y Consumption of boiled drinking water
y Removal of breeding places of flies and cover the food to prevent entering
of flies to food
y Avoid consumption of food which are sold in open places
y Use of water seal latrines
y Proper washing of hands with soap after using the toilet
6.2 Process of respiration
Respiration is a biological process. Gas exchange can be observed in some animals
externally.
Respiration in a human is a complex process and it occurs in three stages.
1. Gas exchange between external environment and lungs
2. Gas exchange in alveoli
3. Cellular respiration
Intake of oxygen into lungs and removal of gaseous waste in cells occurs in external
gas exchange.
For free distribution
150
Human body processes
Biology
Engage in the activity 6.1 to demonstrate external gas exchange
Activity - - 6'1
Demonstration of gas exchange using a model
Materials required :- Small bell jar, gas tube, a cork
bore, two rubber balloons, balloon membrane or
polythene sheath, several rubber bands
Method :- Set the apparatus as shown in the diagram.
Push and release the balloon membrane and observe
the condition of balloons
^A
^A&
^B&
Figure - 6.6
When rubber membrane is pulled down in the above activity the volume inside the
bell jar increases. Then external gas enters and balloons get inflated. When rubber
sheath is released, gas inside balloons go out as the volume of bell jar decreases.
Likewise gas exchange between external environment and lungs occurs due to
changes of volume of lungs.
The system involved in entering O2 into lungs and release of gaseous waste products
produced during biological processes is the respiratory system.
The diagram 6.7 shows the human respiratory system.
Function of the respiratory system
Nasal cavity
Buccal cavity
Larynx
Pharynx
Trachea
Sternum
Bronchus
Ribs
Bronchioles
Diaphragm
Figure 6.7 - Human respiratory system
151
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Main parts of respiratory system are nasal cavity, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi,
bronchioles and alveoli. Internal surface of nasal cavity is covered with mucus.
Due to the presence of mucus in the nasal cavity, the lining of it is moist. There are
numerous cilia present on the lining of the nasal cavity. The bacteria, dust and other
wastes found in inhaled air stick onto the mucus. This prevents the entry of them
into the lungs. By rhythmic movement of cilia the waste materials are sent out. The
materials that are collected at pharynx are removed out with saliva.
The changes that take place when inhaled air passes through the nasal cavity are as
follows.
y Moisturizing/ Humidifying inhaled air
y Warming up of inhaled air up to body temperature
y Removal of foreign matter from inhaled air
Lungs are present in thoracic cavity. Thorasic cavity is protected by ribs. Inter -
costal muscles are present within ribs. The lower limit of thoracic cavity is the
diaphragm. Let's study about the initial activity, in the respirotry system. That is the
gas exchange between external environment and lungs.
Inspiration
During inspiration, air enters into
lungs. For that, the volume of the
lungs should increase. To increase the
volume of the lungs, volume of the
thoracic cavity should be increased.
This occurs due to following changes.
muscles
Inter-costal
contract,
therefore ribs move up and sternum
moves forward.
Figure 6.8 - Inspiration
At the same time the diaphragm contracts and reduce its curvature. Due to above
activities the volume of the thoracic cavity increases and with that volume of lungs
increase. So air enter into lungs through the nose.
Expiration
For expiration to occur, the volume of the
thorasic cavity should decrease to reduce
the volume of the lungs.
This occurs due to the following changes.
Inter-costal muscles relax. So the sternum
and ribs move into its original position.
The diaphragm relax and becomes curved.
Figure 6.9 - Expiration
For free distribution
152
Human body processes
Biology
Due to these activities the volume of the lungs decreases, thereby gas inside lungs
move out through trachea and then nasal cavity.
The gas exchange that takes place in alveoli
Cartilages
bronchioles
Blood
capillaries
Alveoli
Air sac
Figure 6.10 - Air, sacs, alveoli and blood capillaries in lungs
than air inside alveoli, diffuse into the exhaled air.
The
The inhaled air finally reach
the alveoli, through nasal
cavity, trachea, bronchi, and
bronchioles.
O2
concentration in alveoli is
greater than that of the
blood capillary network
around
it. Therefore O2
diffuse out of the alveoli
into the blood capillaries.
Similarly CO2 and water
is
vapour concentration
greater in blood capillaries
Blood
Water vapour
CO2
O2
Oxygen diffuse
to blood
Carbondioxide
diffuse from blood
Figure 6.11 - Air exchange between alveoli and blood capillaries
takes place
Gas exchange takes place
in alveoli and it is shown
in the diagram in Fig
6.11. The place where
gas exchange between
external environment and
blood
is
known as respiratory
surface. Accordingly, the
respiratory
surface of
human is the wall of
alveoli. The exchange of
gases
takes place by
diffusion.
Characteristics of a respiratory surface
The adaptations of the respiratory surfaces for efficient gas exchange are as follows.
y Surface should be moistened and permeable for gas exchange
y Surface should be thin for diffusion of gases
y A larger surface area to exchange large volume of gas according to the
needs of animals
y Surface should be highly vascularized
153
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
In many animals, body cover acts as the respiratory surface and gases exchange
through the body cover. The respiratory surface of human is the wall of alveoli and
the adaptations of the alveoli for efficient gas exchange are as follows.
y Thin alveolar wall
y Moist alveolar surface
y Presence of a blood capillary network around alveoli
y Presence of large number of alveolar sacs
Cellular respiration
Oxygen moved through alveoli reacts with simple organic compounds (glucose)
in cells. In this chemical reaction energy is released, therefore respiration is the
process of oxidation of simple foods to produce energy for biological activities
within living cells.
Let us build a word equation for respiration
Glucose + Oxygen
Carbon dioxide + Water + Energy
The balanced chemical equation for respiration is given below.
C6H12O6 + 6O2
6 CO2 + 6 H2O + Energy
According to the requirement of oxygen two types of respirations can be identified.
Aerobic respiration and Anaerobic respiration
We discussed the respiration that takes place inside cells in the presence of oxygen.
The respiration that takes place in the presence of oxygen is called aerobic
respiration.
Some organisms can respire without O2 . Respiration carried out by organisms
without O2 is known as anaerobic respiration.
Anaerobic respiration that takes place in plants and yeast cells is known as alcohol
fermentation. The anaerobic respiration that takes place inside these cells can be
given by the following word equation.
Glucose
Carbon dioxide + Ethyl alcohol + Energy
When Yeast carries out anaerobic respiration during fermentation, CO2 and Ethyl
alcohol is produced. This process is an example for alcohol fermentation.
For free distribution
154
Human body processes
Biology
Animals including human cells also perform anaerobic respiration. The anaerobic
respiration that takes place within animal cells is referred to as lactic acid fermen-
tation. The products of that is given in the equation given below.
Glucose
Lactic acid + Energy
Have you faced an incident of muscle pain and cramp due to an instant
activity like 100m race. That is due to lactic acid, accumulated in muscles. That is
a result of anaerobic respiration.
Energy produced during aerobic respiration is higher than energy produced during
anaerobic respiration. This is because of the incomplete break down of glucose in
anaerobic respiration and complete break down of glucose in aerobic respiration.
Energy is produced during anaerobic respiration as well as in aerobic respiration.
Part of this energy is lost as heat and rest will be stored in ATP (Adenosine
Tri - Phosphate) as chemical energy.
The energy needed for biological processes is released during break down of ATP.
Functions of ATP
”
”
”
Storage of energy.
Release of energy.
Act as an energy carrier.
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
The energy stored in ATP is used for the following requirements
y Movement of muscles
y Active transportation
y Chemical reactions
organisms
that
take place within
y Synthesis of complex compounds from simple
Proteins)
compounds (E.g.:- Amino acids
y Production of new cells
y Illumination of some organisms. (E.g.:- firefly)
y Generation of electricity in some organisms
(E.g. :- Electric eel)
155
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Diseases associated with respiratory system
y Common cold
Causative agent of common cold is a virus. Headache, sneezing, running nose,
cough are the symptoms of this disease. There is no medical treatment as it is a viral
infection. But can treat for symptoms. By avoiding dust and mist like conditions
which are good for viral growth can recover quickly.
y Pneumonia
Causative agent of pneumonia is a bacteria or a virus. The lungs are infected
and a fluid may accumulate in the lungs. Prolong cold and cough is a reason for
pneumonia. It is important to go for immediate medical treatment.
y Asthma
Asthma is an inflammation that occurs in the body. Dust, pollen, saw dust, fur,
smoke are some causative agents. Due to those substances, the bronchioles get
inflammated and the cross area of them are reduced causing difficulty in breathing
with a sound.
y Bronchitis or bronchiolar inflammation
The bronchioles swell up due to inflammations that occur by viral or bacterial
infections. Heavy cough and difficulty in breathing are symptoms. Other than
bronchioles, larynx may get infected. As a result, voice may not exit properly.
y Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium. Due to multiplication of the particular
bacterium within the lungs, the tissues are damaged. Mainly, the lungs are infected.
But it may affect other parts of the body. Parts of tissue can be released with phlegm.
The lungs are deteriorated and get perforated. Blood release with phlegm due to
breakdown of blood vessels.
Symptoms of tuberculosis
” Tiredness
” Loss of appetite
” Weight loss
” Release of blood during coughing
” Fever
It is important to take precautions and vaccines to avoid tuberculosis. Tuberculosis
can be cured by proper treatment.
Diseases associated with smoking
Smoking cause, lung cancer, bronchitis and some other diseases. Sometimes it may
cause death.
For free distribution
156
Human body processes
Biology
Carbon monoxide (CO) in cigarette smoke is absorbed into blood. CO readily binds
with haemoglobin and avoid binding of O2 with haemoglobin. Therefore carrying
capacity of O2 in blood reduces.
Nicotine found in cigarette smoke increases the heart rate temporally.
Due to destruction of cilia in the respiratory tract, bronchioles may swell up and
get inflamed. It may cause difficulty in breathing. As these epithelial cells expose to
cigarette smoke, they may form abnormal cells which develop into cancers.
Passive smokers also get same harmful effects due to cigarette smoke.
Silicosis
Workers work in quarries, coal mines and glass industry expose to silicon containing
compounds. When these people inhale air with those compounds, they accumulate
in alveoli. Then lung tissues get deteriorated gradually. This disease is known as
silicosis.
Asbestosis
This disorder occurs due to inhalation of air containing asbestos particles and fibres.
Tissues of respiratory tract get destroyed due to accumulation of these particles.
Assignment - 6'3
Collect more information about diseases associated with respiratory system
and preventive measures to prepare a small booklet.
6.3 Process of excretion
Summation of bio chemical reactions that take place in the living body is known as
metabolism
Examples for several metabolic activities are given below
²
²
Production of carbondioxide, water and energy during cellular respiration
Production of urea, uric acid in protein catabolism in liver
When metabolic processes occur in the cells, necessary as well as unnecessary
materials are produced. These unnecessary materials should be removed from the
body.
The waste products that are produced during metabolic process are called excretory
materials. Removal of excretory products produced during metabolism from
the body is called excretion.
Different excretory materials, organs through which the excretory materials are
excreted and the form of excretion is shown in table 6.2.
157
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Table 6.2 - Different excretory materials
Excretory materials
CO2 ,Water vapour
Urea, Uric acid, Salts, Water
Urea, Uric acid, NaCl, Water
Excretory
organ
Lungs
Kidney
Skin
Form of
Excretion
Exhale air
Urine
Sweat
Why faecal matter is not an excretory substance?
Faeces is the undigested materials of the digestion process. Digestion takes place
within the digestive system. Digestion of food is not a bio chemical reaction that
takes place in the cells. So faeces is not considered as an excretory material. The
bile pigments that is released with faeces is an excretory substance.
Urinary System
Renal artery
Kidneys
Renal vein
The main organ that carries out nitrogenous
excretion is the kidney.
A pair of kidneys and other organs are
organized to form urinary system.
Systemic artery
Inferior vena cava
The main parts of the urinary system are as
follows
Ureters
Bladder
y
y
y
y
Pair of kidneys
Pair of ureters
Urinary bladder
Urethra
Urethra
Figure 6.12 - Human urinary system
The waste materials in blood enter through renal arteries are filltered inside the
kidney. This filtrate is known as urine and it is transported through ureters and
stored temporary in urinary bladder. Next it is released out of the body through
urethra.
For free distribution
158
Human body processes
Activity - 6'2
Biology
Observation of internal structure of a kidney
Required materials :- A specimen of a kidney of a goat or a cow or a model
Method :- ² Observe the above specimen carefully (get the assistance
of human kidney.
from your science teacher)
² Identify the parts of kidney
Parts of a human kidney is shown in figure 6.13.
Capsule
Cortex
Pyramids
Renal vein
Renal artery
Pelvis
Ureter
Cortex
Nephron
Medula
Figure 6.13 - Longitudinal view of kidney
Figure 6.14 - Location of nephrons in kidney
The structural and functional unit of kidney is nephron. Nephron is microscopic and there are about
one million of them in a kidney. The parts of a nephron can be identified as in the diagram 6.15.
Distal convoluted
tubules
Collecting duct
Glomerulus
Bowman's capsule
Renal artery
Proximal convoluted
tubules
Renal vein
Descending limb
Ascending limb
Blood capillaries
L oop of
Henle
Figure 6.15 - Structure of a nephron
159
For free distribution
Biology
Process of urine formation
Urine formation in kidney follows three main processes,
Human body processes
1' Ultra filtration
2' Selective reabsorption
3' Secretion
Ultrafiltration
i o l e
r
e
t
t A r
e
n
r
A f f e
glomerular filterate
Bowman's
capsule
Efferent Arteriole
Each afferent arteriole enters into
each Bowman's capsule, where they
further divide forming a dense
network of capillaries. It is known
as glomerulus. The blood flow
through the glomerulus is having a
high blood pressure because the
diameter of efferent arteriole is
smaller than diameter of afferent
arteriole. So blood gets filtered
through the wall of glomerulus and
the inner wall of the bowman’s
capsule and collected into the cavity
of Bowman’s capsule. This process
is known as ultrafiltration. This
to as
filtered fluid
glomerular filtrate. Large molecules like plasma proteins and blood cells are not
filtered into the glomerular filtrate. Glomerular filterate is as same as blood plasma.
The constituents of glomerulur filtrate are water, glucose, amino acids, vitamins,
drugs, various ions, hormones and urea.
Figure 6.16 - Glomerular filterate collected
into the cavity of bowman’s capsule
is referred
tubule
Selective reabsorption
When glomerular filterate moves along the nephron most of the constituents absorb
again into the blood capillaries associated with nephron. This is called Selective
reabsorption. 90% of the water, all glucose, amino acids and vitamins part of salts,
small amount of urea, uric acid and durgs reabsorb into blood. The composition of
glomerular filtrate change with selecteve reabsorption. Then the glomerular filtrate
is released into collecting ducts and then to the pelvis. The volume of glomerular
filterate formed during one minute in a healthy adult is about 120 cm3. But 95% of
the glomerular filtrate reabsorb when it moves along the nephron.
For free distribution
160
Human body processes
Biology
Blood flowing
out of kidney
Collecting duct
100% of glucose is reabsorbed in a
healthy adult. But in diabetes patients
glucose is not totally reabsorbed. The
remaining glucose is released with
urine.
Secretion
Some of the materials in the blood
capillaries associated with nephron
enter the tubules of nephron. This
process is known as secretion.
E.g (¡ Hydrogen ions (H+), Potasium
ions (K+), Ammonium ions (NH
4),
Creatinine, drugs, Vitamin B
+
glomerular
filterate
Water (95])
Glucose ^100]&
Minerals
(Some amount&
Urea
(Some amount&
Amino acids
Vitamins
Figure 6.17 - Materials reaborsobed
during urine formation
Removal of urine from the body
Urine released into the pelvis is transported along ureters into bladder and is
temporally stored in bladder. Release of urine takes place according to the need of
urination.
The composition of urine in a healthy person is given below in the table 6.3
Table 6.3 - Composition of urine in a healthy person
Constituent
Water
Salts
Urea
Uric acid
Creatinine
Composition
About 96%
About 2%
About 2%
Trace
Trace
Diseases associated with urinary system
Assignment - 6'4
Write a report on diseases associated with urinary system to make aware the
society about them.
161
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Let us discuss some of the diseases associated with urinary system.
Renal failure
Kidneys fail to function due to the weakening of urine filteration process in
nephrons. Infections by microoganisms, heavy metals (mercury, arsenic) various
medicine and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) may cause renal failure. The basic
symptom is oedema and increase of blood pressure due to accumulation of water
and salts. pH of blood decreases due to accumulation of urea and other excretory
materials. By taking immediate treatments and healthy life style one can maintain a
healthy kidney. If treatments are not taken immediately after the symptoms, acute
renal failure may occur within 8-14 days. Then blood is filtered by a machine in
a process called dialysis. When both kidneys are failed, a healthy kidney from a
donor should be transplanted.
Nephritis
Nephritis or swelling of kidney occurs due to infections and toxins. Infections in
ureters and other changes that occur in the body are reasons for nephritis. During
nephritis, it affects glomerulus and also uriniferous tubules. Due to damages occur
in glomerulus, the volume of blood flow through it, reduces. So the amount of
urine formed also reduces. Therefore the waste materials remaining within the body
become high. Sometimes due to damages that occur in glomerules, filtering process
is affected and as a result, red blood cells can be passed into the glomerular filtrate.
Similarly proteins also can be filtered and due to loss of these essential proteins,
strokes may occur. Medical advice should be taken immediately for this condition.
Calculi in kidney and bladder
Crystalization of calcium oxalate in kidney and bladder is the reason for this
condition. When these stones block ureters, severe pain would occur. Removal of
these stones can be done by drugs or a surgery.
These stones can be crushed by applying laser rays / ultra sound waves, and this
technique is called Lithotripsy technology.
The feeding habit of a person is also a reason for these stones. Postponing of
urination is also a reason for the above disorder. Drinking of required volume of
water daily is helpful to avoid this condition.
For free distribution
162
homogeneous field
Human body processes
Biology
6.4 Process of blood circulation
Glucose and oxygen are the main components to produce energy in the body. Blood
is the transport medium of both the above components to the cells and the waste
out of the cells.
Plasma 55]
(Pale yellow colour fluid)
Corpuscles 45]
(Dark red colour materials)
Blood is a special connective tissue. It is a red
colour fluid. When blood is centrifuged and
kept aside, there will be two different layers.
layer consists of blood
The dark
corpuscles while the pale yellow layer contains
the plasma. On this basis, blood which is seen
as a homogeneous fluid, contains a plasma and
a suspension of corpuscles. When a slide with a blood smear observed through the
microscope there will be several types of corpuscles in it.
Figure 6.18 - Blood corpuscles and plasma
red
Blood
Corpuscles
Plasma
Red Blood
cells
White
Blood cells
Platelets
Granulocytes
Non-granulocytes
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Basophils Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Red Blood cells (Erythrocytes)
One cubic millimetre of human blood contain
about five million of red blood cells. These red
coloured and biconcave disc-like cells are clearly
visible among the other corpuscles. They form in
red bone marrow. The life span of RBC is about
four months (120 days). Absence of nucleus in
red blood cells provides a large surface area to
absorb more oxygen. A pigment called
haemoglobin is present in red blood cells.
Haemoglobin binds with oxygen and form
oxyhaemoglobin to transport oxygen to cells.
163
For free distribution
Figure 6.19 - Red blood cells
under electron microscope
Biology
White Blood cells (WBC)
Human body processes
A type of corpuscle, larger than the size of red blood cells, but smaller in number is
present in blood. They are with nuclei and form in bone marrow. They are colourless
and known as white blood cells. The ratio between red blood cells to white blood
cells is 600:1
Two Types of WBC present in blood
” Granulocytes
” Non-granulocytes
Granulocytes are further divided into three types,
” Neutrophils
”
Eosinophils
” Basophils
Non-granulocytes are in two types,
”
Lymphocytes
”
Monocytes
One cubic millimeter (1 mm3) of human blood contains 4 000 - 11 000 number of
WBC.
The following table shows the percentages of WBC in a healthy person.
Table 6.4 - Percentages of WBC in a healthy person
Type of corpuscle
Variety and morphology
Percentage ]
Granulocytes
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Basophils
50 - 70
1 - 4
0 - 1
For free distribution
164
Human body processes
Non-granulocytes
Biology
Lymphocytes
20 - 40
Monocytes
2 - 8
WBC destroy infectious particles that enter the body by phagocytosis. Therefore
percentages of WBC increase above the normal levels in microbial infections.
Investigation of WBC counts in blood helps to diagnose diseases.
The function of WBC is to protect the body from infectious particles that enter the
body. This is done by phagocytosis and by producing antibodies.
Platelets
In addition to RBC and WBC there are fragments of cells that cannot be considered
as cells in human blood. These corpuscles without nuclei are known as platelets.
One cubic milimetre of blood contains 150 000-400 000 platelets. They form in
bone marrow. Life span of platelets is approximately 5-7 days. Due to diseases
like Dengue and Leptospirosis, platelet count drops drastically. Platelets contain
thromboplastin which help in coagulation of blood.
Blood plasma
92% of blood plasma is water. Other than water the second most abundant compound
is protein. Nutrients, nitrogenous waste, hormones, enzymes, gases and ions are
present in blood plasma.
Blood Plasma
Water protein
² Albumen
² Globulin
² Fibrinogen
Nutrients
² Monosaccharides
² Amino acids
² Fatty acids
² Glycerol
² Vitamin
Ions
² Na+
² K+
² Ca2+
² Mg2+
² Cl-
² PO4
² SO4
² HCO-
2-
3-
3
Nitrogenous
byproducts
² Urea
² Uric acid
² Creatinine
Gases
² O2
² CO2
² N2
H
o
r
m
o
n
e
s
A
n
t
i
g
e
n
s
A
n
i
b
o
d
i
e
s
165
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Function of blood
y Transportation of materials (digested end products, respiratory gases, excretory
byproducts, hormones, mineral ions and proteins)
y Protect body against pathogenic microbes by phagocytosis and by producing
antibodies.
y Maintenance of chemical coordination and homeostatis among tissues and
organs
Blood Circulation
Do the activity 6.3 to observe blood circulation in capillaries.
Activity -- 6'3
Observation of blood circulation in blood capillaries
Materials required:-
A small live fish or tadpole, A glass slide, Wet
cotton, A microscope
cotton, A microscope
Method :-
Figure 6.20 -
Figure 6.20 - A slide with
Figure 6.20 - A slide with
a tadpole
y Place the small live fish or tadpole
on the slide and cover the gills
with wet cotton
y Observe the blood capillaries in
tail area through light microscope
y Change
the specimen
in 10
minutes time to keep it live
You have observed the flow of blood within the blood vessels in the above activity.
The force generated by the heart helps to distribute blood through the body. Carry
out Activity 6.4 to understand the structure of the heart.
Activity -- 6'4
Observe the structure of the heart
Materials required:-
Method :-
A specimen or a model of a heart
² Observe the external structure of the heart
² Observe its internal chambers, connected arteries and veins, bicuspid and
tricuspid valves.
² Observe that the atrial walls are thinner than ventricular walls and the
thickest wall in the left ventricle.
² Use the diagram 6.21 to identify the parts.
For free distribution
166
Human body processes
Superior
vena
cava
Right
pulmonary
artery
Right
Pulmonary
veins
R i g h t
atrium
Tricuspid
valve
I n f e r i o r
vena cava
Right
ventricle
Aorta
Left pulmonary
artery
Left Pulmonary
veins
Left atrium
Bicuspid valve
(Mitral valve)
Semi lunar
valves
Left ventricle
Figure 6.21 - A longitudinal
section of the human heart
Biology
Arterial
system
the
consists of all
arteries in the blood
circulatory system. It
transports oxygenated
blood. But pulmonary
artery
transports
deoxygenated blood
to the lungs. Venous
system consists of all
the veins in the blood
circulatory system. It
t r a n s p o r t s
deoxygenated blood.
But pulmonary veins transport oxygenated blood from lungs to the left atrium.
The two systems are shown in figure 6.22
Head
Oxygenated blood
Deoxygenatel blood
Pulmonary artery
Inferior vena-cava
Hepatic vein
Hepatic portal vein
Renal vein
Artery that carries
blood from lower
parts to the heart
Lungs
Artery that carries blood
to head and hands
Pulmonary veins
Liver
Intestine
Hepatic artery
Artery that supplies blood
to the intestines
Kidneys
Renal artery
Artery that carries blood to lower
parts of the body and legs
Figure 6.22 - Blood circulation of human
167
For free distribution
Biology
Double blood circulation
Human body processes
Lungs
fmkye,s
Superior vena cava
Systemic artery
uyd Ouksh
mqmaMqYSh Ysrdj
Pulmonary veins
Pulmonary artery
mqmaMqYSh Ouksh
wOr uyd Ysrdj
Inferior vena cava
wOr uyd Ysrdj
circulation where
The
blood flows through lungs
is known as pulmonary
The
circulation.
circulation where blood
flows through the rest of
other organs is known as
circulation.
systemic
Right ventricle of the heart
acts as the pump for the
pulmonary circulation, and
left ventricle
the
systemic circulation. So it
is clear that blood flows twice through heart before entering into systemic artery. In
human, when the blood circulates once through the body it flows twice through the
heart. This is called as double circulation.
Figure 6.23 - Double circulation
6'4'5 rEmh ¡ oaú;aj reêr ixirKh
wjhj
wjhj
Organs
for
Heart beat
Atria and Ventricles of heart contract to pump blood out of the heart. These
contractions and dilations of heart muscle are known as heart beat. The heart beat
rate of a healthy person at rest, is 72 beats per minute. Pulse rate is also similar to
heart beat rate.
Cardiac cycle
In one heart beat atria contract when ventricles dilate. Next ventricles contract, atria
dilate. Contraction of atria is known as diastole (0.1 seconds) whereas contraction
of ventricles is known as systole (0.3 seconds). After that atria and ventricles are in
relax mode and it is known as intervening (0.4 seconds).
Cardiac cycle refers to a complete heart beat from its generation to the beginning of
the next beat. The stages of cardiac cycle are as follows;
1) Diastole - Atrial contraction
2) Systole - Ventricular contraction
3) Intervening - Atrial and Ventricular relaxation (complete cardiac diastole)
Electro cardio gram (E.C.G) is used to get information about heart function. This
tracing denote the potential changes take place in cardiac muscle cells during heart
function. Three stages of cardiac cycle can be identified in ECG (Figure 6.24).
For free distribution
168
Human body processes
Biology
Figure 6.24 - Electro cardio gram of a healthy person
P - Atrial contraction
QRS - Ventricular contraction
T - Intervening
ECG wave patterns deviate from normal patterns due to dysfunction of heart.
Lub - Dup sound in heart beat can be heard by keeping ear or stethoscope on
chest. Lub sound is longer than Dup sound. Lub sound is produced when
bicuspid and tricuspid valves close in atrial contraction. Next produce Dup sound
and it is shorter. This Dup sound is resulted when semi lunar valves close.
Blood pressure
When heart beats, it contracts and pushes blood through the arteries to the rest of
the body. This force creates pressure on the ateries. This is called systolic blood
pressure.
systolic blood pressure
Normal
is
110-120 mmHg. Diastolic blood pressure
is the pressure in the arteries when heart
rests between beats. A normal diastolic
blood pressure is between 70-80 mmHg.
Blood pressure is measured in millimeters
of mercury (mmHg).
Figure 6.25 - Measuring of blood pressure
Normal resting blood pressure is mentioned as follows
Blood pressure (B.P) } 120$80 mm Hg
Ageing, sex, stressful mentality, diseases of a human are the factors that can increase
blood pressure.
Another transportation system closely linked with blood circulatory system is
present in human body and it is known as Lymphatic system.
169
For free distribution
Biology
Lymphatic system
Heart
Artery
Network of capillaries
Body tissue
Vein
Lymph vessels
Figure 6.26 ¡ Relationship between blood
circulation and lymph circulation
Human body processes
Blood capillaries transport
blood through cells in the
tissues. Blood capillary walls
are very thin but only WBC
and blood plasma can move
through the capillary wall.
RBC and
some plasma
proteins cannot move through
capillary wall. This fluid
moved to tissue is known as
fluid. Materials
tissue
exchanged within somatic
cells
and blood occurs
through this tissue fluid.
Part of tissue fluid is absorbed back to capillaries. Excess tissue fluid within
intercellular spaces connect with blood circulatory system through a special tubular
system known as lymphatic system.
Right subclavian
vein
Right lymphatic
duct
Lymph
nodes
Left subclavian
vein
Thoracic
duct
Intestines
The tissue fluid flowing in the
lymphatics is called lymph.
around
Lymphatic system consists of
lacteals, Lymph capillaries
and lymph nodes. Lymph is
flowing due to pressure caused
by muscles
lymph
vessels. All the lymph vessels
in the body form two main
are,Thoracic
vessels. They
duct and right lymphatic duct.
Thoracic duct empties lymph
to left subclavian vein. Right
lymphatic duct empties lymph
to right sublavian vein and then
to the venous circulation at last.
Figure 6.27 - Human lymphatic system
For free distribution
170
lymphatic
Main function of
of
system
is
infectious
like
bacteria. WBC in lymph nodes
destruction
organisms
Human body processes
Biology
destroy them by phagocytosis. Then these lymph nodes become more active and
swollen (Kuddeti). Lymph nodes can be found mostly around liver, heart, intestines,
skin, arm pits and throat.
Diseases associted with blood circulatory system
Assignment - 6'5
Prepare a booklet about diseases associated with blood circulatory system
and preventive measures to control them. Collect information about
following disorders and compare them with given facts.
² Artherosclerosis
² Heart attack
² Hypertension
² Thrombosis
Artherosclerosis
Cholesterol is an essential lipid compound produced by the liver. As cholesterol is
insoluble in water it is transported as lipo proteins by combining with proteins. Lipo
proteins are of two types. Low density lipo proteins ^LDL& and High density lipo
proteins ^HDL&. Excessive amount of low density lipo proteins deposit in coronary
arteries and other arteries. Thereby the size of the lumen in arteries reduces. The
lipid deposits like this in arteries are called Atheroma and the condition that occur
is called Artherosclerosis.
Due to blocking of coronary arteries, the blood supply to heart is affected. Some parts
of the cardiac muscle will be failed to function causing angina (Chest pain). Due
to blockage of coronary arteries the region of the cardiac muscle will not receive
blood and that region is failed. This condition is called heart failure.
The reason to increase LDL is consumption of food containing high amount
of saturated fatty acids (beef, pork, mutton, full cream milk, egg yolk, prawns,
and liver). By controlling such food types and regular exercises can control
artherosclerosis.
Hypertension and hypotension
Due to deposition of cholesterol inside arteries, the size of the lumen reduces.
Therefore blood supply to different organs get lowered. So to supply required
amount of blood, heart has to exert more pressure. The higher pressure exerted
onto the arterial wall is called hypertension pressure. Reduction of elasticity of the
artery or arteriole wall also a reason for hypotension.
171
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Reduction of consumption of saturated fatty acid is important to control this
condition. One has to avoid smoking, consumption of alcohol, mental stress, obesity
to control hypertension.
Hypotension is the low blood pressure. The blood become less than the normal. Low
blood pressure occurs mostly due to nutrient deficiencies. During this condition one
has to get treatments to increase blood pressure to normal quickly.
Thrombosis
When blood supply to a certain organ is affected due to a blood clot in a blood
vessel is called thrombosis. If blood supply to a part of the brain is affected due to a
blood clot, the organs that are controlled by that part of the brain fail. This condition
is normally called paralysis. If the function of heart is affected due to a blood clot
in the coronary artery it is called coronary thrombosis. Due to this, heart attack
may occur.
Thrombosis can be controlled by steps taken from child hood. They are as follows,
² Avoiding alcohol and smoking
² Reduction of consumption of food containing saturated fatty acids.
² Consumption of food with more fibre
² Reduce salt consumption
² Reduce body weight by proper food habits
² Regular physical exercises
² Peaceful mental status
If there is a record about heart attacks, hypertension, diabetes in family history, one
has to be more careful about this condition.
6.5 Coordination and homeostasis in human
Do you remember taking away your leg, when a thorn pricks your foot? This action
has taken place as living beings have the ability to respond to stimuli coming from
external and internal environments. That is known as irritability.
Above response is due to adaptation of body according to the changes of
external and internal environments. That is called coordination. The change
that takes place in the external environment which is detectable by the sensory
organs is called a stimulus. The organs that can detect (sense) the stimuli are called
sensory organs (receptors). Eye, nose, ear, tongue and skin act as sensory organs.
For free distribution
172
Human body processes
Assignment - -6'6
Biology
Complete the table using different receptor organs and the stimulus that can
be detected.
Sensory organ
Eye
Ear
Nose
Tongue
Skin
Stimulus that is detected
Light energy
'''''''''''''''''''''
'''''''''''''''''''''
'''''''''''''''''''''
'''''''''''''''''''''
The reaction for a stimulus is known as a response. The response is done by
effectors. Muscles and glands act as effectors.
Recall the incident about the thorn prick. Touch due to the thorn prick on the leg is
the stimulus. The receptor of that stimulus is the skin. Taking the foot away is the
response to that stimulus. Responding is done using muscles of the foot and that
is the effector.
Assignment - 6'7
When you sense smell of tasty food, saliva is secreted into the mouth. State
the stimulus, sensory organ, response and effector in this action.
You will understand that there should be a proper communication between organs/
tissues to carry out body functions smoothly. Identification of the changes in the
external and internal environments and responding accordingly is done by the
coordination.
For coordination, two inter connected but different systems present in the human
body.
² Nervous system
² Endocrine system
The coordination done by nervous system, is called nervous coordination, and
coordination by endocrine system is called chemical coordination. In nervous
coordination, impulses transmit through nerves and these impulses aim at a specific
effector. In chemical coordination hormones secrete to blood and according to the
concentration of hormone the particular effector respond to it.
173
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Nervous coordination
Due to an electro chemical change in the nerves, impulses are transmitted through
nerves. A proper coordination is maintained between the receptor and the effector.
The nervous coordination takes place with the involvement of the nervous system.
The structural unit of the nervous system is the neuron. There are three types of
neurons in the nervous system.
² Sensory neuron
² Motor neuron
²
Inter neuron
The nervous system is mainly composed of two components. They are the central
nervous system and peripheral nervous system. The structure of it can be shown by
the following simplified diagram.
Nervous system
Central nervous system
Peripheral nervous system
Brain
Cerebrum
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
Medulla oblongata
Cranial nerves
(12 pairs)
Spinal nerves
(31 pairs)
Central nervous system
Central nervous system is very important in controlling of activities and coordination.
Brain and spinal cord belong to central nervous system. Skull provides protection
to the brain. Vertebral column provides protection to the spinal cord.
Brain and spinal cord are covered by meninges. There is a special fluid found within
the cavities of brain and between meninges. It is known as cerebro spinal fluid. The
functions of cerebro spinal fluid are given below,
² Support bouncy to brain and spinal cord
² Absorption of shocks and jerks
² Protection against microbial infections and desiccation
² Protect from temperature fluctuations.
For free distribution
174
Human body processes
Biology
• Brain
Brain is protected by the cranium and surrounded by three linings called meninges.
The brain is about 1/50 of the body weight. There are about hundred billion of
neurons. Other than neurons another accessory cells called neuroglia are present
in brain. The brain is composed of three main parts, as Cerebrum, Cerebellum and
Medulla oblongata. (Figure 6.28)
Cerebrum
Cerebellum
Medulla oblongata
The peripheral region of the brain
is composed of grey matter made
up of cell bodies and the interior
with white matter due to myelin
sheath made up of nerve fibres.
Figure 6.28 - External view of human brain
Assignment - 6'5
Observation of parts of brain
Take a model / live specimen of a mammalian brain and identify the parts of it
with the guidance of the teacher.
Cerebrum
Cerebrum
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Medulla
oblongata
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
Figure 6.29 -¡ Longitudinal section of human brain
Cerebrum is the largest
and most
highly
developed part of the
brain. It is divided into
right
left
and
hemispheres.
The
cortex of the cerebrum
is highly convoluted to
increase
surface
the
area. The left cerebral
hemisphere controls the
right half of the body
and the right cerebral
hemisphere controls the
left part of the body.
175
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Functions of cerebrum
² Perception of impulses from receptors, identification of received sensory
information and storage of those information.
² Perception of senses about vision, taste, smell, hearing, pain and temperature
² Perform high mental activities such as learning, intelligence and thinking.
² Controlling of voluntary muscle contraction.
Cerebellum
This is located just below the latter part of the cerebrum. It consists of two
hemispheres. It is of grey matter in the outer layer and white matter in the interior
layer.
Functions of cerebellum
² Maintenance of body balance
² Control of voluntary muscle activity
²
Involve in maintenance of body movement
Medulla oblongata
It is located anteriorly interior to cerebellum. It is an important centre in controlling
many life processes.
Functions of medulla oblongata
² Control involuntary actions such as rate of heart beat and rate of respiration
² Control reflex actions such as vomiting, coughing and swallowing.
• Spinal cord
White matter
Grey matter
Central canal
Figure 6.30 - Cross section of human spinal cord
For free distribution
176
runs
It is a tubular structure
starting from medulla
inferiorly
oblongata
through
and
vertebral
column.
white
Peripherally
matter and interiorly
grey matter is present
in the spinal cord. The
spinal nerves
start
symmetrically at either
side of the spinal cord.
Human body processes
Reflex arc
Sensory neuron
Intermediate neuron
Motor neuron
Biology
Receptors receive
stimuli
Effectors respond
to stimuli
Figure 6.31 - Reflex arc
Stimulation of the pain
receptors in the skin
Sensory
Neuron
Spinal cord
(Inter neuron)
Motor
Neuron
Effector
(Muscles of leg)
We know that there is a proper coordination maintained by nervous system between
the receptors and effectors in the body. The impulses are sent from receptors to the
central nervous system and from central nervous system into the effectors. The
functional unit of the nervous system that maintains the coordination is called
the reflex arc.
Three types of nerve cells involve in a reflex arc. They are sensory neuron, inter
neuron and motor neuron. The reflex actions take place with the involvement of the
reflex arc.
Reflex actions
A sudden, involuntary response to a particular stimulus is called a reflex action.
They take place without the consciousness of the involvement of the brain.
The reflex actions are of two types as, spinal reflexes and cranial reflexes.
Examples for spinal reflexes
y Moving the hand away when it contacts with a hot surface
y Lifting the leg when you step on a thorn
Examples for cranial reflexes
Sneezing
y
y
Salivation
y Blinking eyelids
177
For free distribution
Biology
Assignment - 6'8
State the reflexes you encounter in day today life
Human body processes
Autonomic nervous system
The nervous supply from the autonomic nervous system is to the internal organs
of the body which are involuntarily controlled. This nervous system coordinates
involuntary activities in the body.
The coordinating centres of the autonomic nervous system are hypothalamus and
medulla oblongata. The autonomic nervous system is composed of two parts.
²
²
Sympathetic nervous system
Parasympathetic nervous system
The sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems cause opposite effects. The
sympathetic system activates when a person is at emergency. It causes fight or flight
effects.
Figure 6.32 - Fight or flight effect caused by sympathetic system
The changes that occur due to the activities of sympathetic system, will be neutralised
by the parasympathetic system.
For free distribution
178
Human body processes
Biology
Reduces size
of pupil
Stimulates
saliva secretion
Reduces heart
beat rate
Decreases the rate
of aeration of lungs
Increases
peristalysis
™
Parasympathetic nervous
system
Increases size
of pupil
Inhibits saliva
secretion
Increases heart
beat rate
Increases rate of
aeration of lungs
Decreases
peristalsis
š
Sympathetic nervous
system
Figure 6.33 - Parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous supply on body organs
Chemical co-ordination
Chemical co-ordination is also important as nervous co-ordination to the survival
of organism. Hormones secreted by endocrine glands are used in chemical
co-ordination. Endocrine glands or ductless glands secrete hormones, directly into
blood stream. So hormones are transported through blood.
Features of hormones -
y Hormones are organic compounds
y They are transported through blood
y Produced at one site and act on another site
y Stimulate target organs or target cells
y Small concentration is required
y
179
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
The endocrine glands of human body
There are several endocrine glands
located in human body. (Figure 6.34)
The main endocrine glands are
mentioned below.
² Pituitary
² Thyroid
² Pancreas
² Adrenal gland
² Gonads (testes and ovaries)
Pituitary gland
Thyroid
Adrenal glands
Kidneys
Pancreas
Ovaries
Testes
Figure 6.34 - Location of endocrine glands in human
body
The facts of several hormones are given in table 6.5.
Table 6.5 - Several hormones secreted by endocrine glands of human
Gland
Pituitary
Thyroid
Pancreas
Adrenal
glands
Location of gland
Below the
hypothalamus in
the cerebrum
Hormone
Growth
hormone
Posterior to tracheal
and dorsal part of
neck
In
the bend of
duodenum between
stomach and large
intestine
On the surface of
kidneys
Calcitonin
Thyroxin
Insulin
Glucogen
Adrenaline
For free distribution
180
Utility
Increase protein synthesis.
Growth of ordinary body
tissues. Growth of long
bones.
Reduce calcium level in
blood.
Control metabolic rate
Convert
glycogen
glucose
into
into
Convert glycogen
glucose
Prepare body to activate in
an emergency
Human body processes
Biology
Testes
Outside the
abdominal region
in testes.
Testosterone Development of secondary
sexual Characteristics in
boys
Induces Spermatogenesis
Development of secondary
sexual Characteristics in
girls
Maintenance of pregnancy
and menstrual cycle
Ovaries
Below the kidneys Oestrogen
Progesterone
Homeostasis
Maintenance of constant internal environment is called homoeostasis.
The internal environment is the immediate surrounding of the cell which provides
medium for the cell to survive. The tissue fluid around cells, the plasma around
blood cells and lymph are included into the internal environment.
When internal environment is constant, the conditions inside cells is also constant.
If there is a small change in the internal environment it highly affects the cellular
activities. Therefore the internal environment should maintain stable conditions or
within a narrow range, which can be tolerated by the cells. If not, automatic control
system will be active with feedback mechanisms.
The factors in the internal environment that has to be regulated
² Blood glucose level
² Body temperature
² Water balance
Regulation of blood glucose level
Blood glucose level of a healthy adult is 80-120 mg/100 ml of blood. When blood
glucose level is greater than the normal level beta cells in islets of langerhans in
pancreas secrete more insulin. This hormone converts glucose into glycogen and
then glycogen store in liver. Further excess glucose is converted to fat and stored
in adipose tissue.
When blood glucose level is less than normal (when a person is starving) alpha
cells in islets of langerhans in pancreas are stimulated to secrete more glucogen.
This glucogen acts on glycogen stored in liver to convert it into glucose and release
into blood. The blood glucose level will be increased to normal level.
Due to the activities of insulin and glucogen, blood glucose level is regulated. Due
to absence of beta cells or secretion of insulin will cause diabetes.
181
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Regulation of body temperature
Human is a homoithermic organism. Homoithermic means maintenance of con-
stant body temperature irrespective to the fluctuations of temperature in the envi-
ronment. Normal body temperature of human is 37 0C. But it can vary from 36 0C
to 37.5 0C.
Thermo regulatory centre of the human is present in the hypothalamus of the brain.
When environmental temperature drops to avoid the decrease of body temperature,
hypothalamus stimulates and carries out the activities below.
² Reduce blood supply to skin to reduce heat loss, by contracting blood capil-
laries in the skin.
² Reduce production of sweat in sweat glands and reduce heat loss.
² The hairs become erect and trap an air layer to act as a heat insulating layer.
²
If the heat loss is high, heat is generated by shivering.
When temperature of the internal environment increases, to prevent the increase of
body temperature, the hypothalamus stimulates to activate the processes as follows,
²
²
Dilate blood vessels in the skin and thereby increase blood supply to skin and
increase heat loss.
Increase sweat production by sweat glands. When sweat is evaporated heat is
absorbed by body and decrease body temperature.
Regulation of body temperature is done by the hypothalamus.
Regulation of water balance
When the water level of blood drops, pituitary secretes ADH (Antidiuresis hormone).
This ADH acts on kidney to increase reabsorption of water, thereby reduce the
amount of water released with urine.
When water level in blood is high, the reabsorption of water decreases and the
amount of water released with urine increases.
Accordingly water balance in the body is regulated.
For free distribution
182
Human body processes
Biology
Summary
• D i g e s t i o n ,
respiration, blood circulation, excretion and coordination are several
biological processes that take place in human body.
• Food digestion is the process by which the complex organic compounds are
converted into simple organic products which get absorbed into the human
body.
• Enzymes are important in food digestion. Glucose from carbohydrates,
fatty acids and glycerol from lipids and amino acids from protein are the
end products of food digestion.
• Bile helps to emulsify lipids in lipid digestion.
• Several medicine, vitamins, alcohol and glucose are some of the materials
absorbed directly into blood, without digestion.
• Respiration is the process of oxidation of simple foods within living cells.
• Respiratory system involves in taking oxygen into lungs and release of
gaseous waste products out of lungs.
• Part of energy produced during anaerobic and aerobic respiration is lost as
heat and rest will be deposited in ATP as chemical energy.
• Excretion is the removal of excretory products, produced during metabolism.
• Kidneys, skin and lungs are the organs which carry out excretion of human.
• The functional and the structural unit of kidney is nephon. The excretory
materials produced in nephrons is referred to as urine.
• Urinary system is the anatomical system which involves in the production
and removal of urine from the body.
• Circulating substances in the body and protecting the body from micro
orgamisms are the function of the blood circulatory system.
• Blood is composed of blood cells and plasma
• Heart functions as a pumping machine of the blood circulatory system.
It is a double circulation which consists of the systemic and pulmonary
circulation.
• The diastole, the systole and the intervening phase are the three major stages
of a cardiac cycle.
183
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
²
In the lymphatic system, places where lymphatic vessels aggregate are
called lymph nodes. Germs that enter the body are destroyed within the
lymph nodes.
² Maintaining proper balance between stimulus and response is called as
coordination.
² The nervous system and the endocrine system involve in maintaining
coordination.
² The structural unit of the nervous system is the neuron where as the functional
unit of nervous system is reflex arc.
² Brain and spinal cord belong to central nervous system.
² Reflex arc consists of motor neuron, sensory neuron and inter neuron.
² Autonomic nervous system is important to control involuntary body
functions.
² Autonomic nervous system is organized to control opposite actions via
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems.
² Hormones which are secreted to the blood from the glands regulate the
chemical coordination of the body.
² Homeostasis is the maintenance of a constant internal environment free
from the changes in the external environment.
² Regulating blood glucose, body temperature and water balance is important
in homeostasis.
Excercise
^1&
3
4
2
Duodenum
1
Stomach
A part of the human digestive system is
shown in the figure. Answer the questions
raised on it.
I. Name the parts 1, 2, 3, 4
II. In the food that reaches stomach
a) Name one enzyme that could be
present in it.
b) Name a product of digestion that
could be present in it'
For free distribution
184
Human body processes
Biology
III. a) Name two enzymes which are added to the food in the stomach.
b) Proteins are digested partially in the stomach. Explain this using the
changes that occur in proteins.
IV. a) Name the enzymes which are in the digestive juice/ fluid secreted by the
organ No 2 to duodenum.
b) Name two secretions that influence lipid digestion.
c) Name the organs from which they are secreted.
V. Gastritis is a common disease of the digestive system. State three reasons
for this disease
VI. Why protein digestive enzymes do not digest the wall of the digestive
system.
^2&
A
B
C
D
An organ which is related to
the respiratory process and its
internal structure is shown in
the figures.
a) Answer the following questions.
i). Name the parts A, B, C, D
ii). What is the respiratory surface shown in the diagram.
iii).Write two adaptations of that respiratory surface for the efficient gas
exchange.
iv). What are the differences in blood composition of the vessels P and Q?
v). To which chamber does the blood flow through P ?
vi). What is the illness which shows symptom, swelling of B, C parts due to
bacteria or virus infections?
b) Choose the correct answer
i) What is the respiratory product produced only in animals?
1) Energy 2) CO2 3) Ethyl alcohol 4) Lactic acid
185
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
ii)Which of the following is not produced using anaerobic respiration
1) Alcohol 2) Biogas 3) Bread 4) Yogurt
^3& A figure of the structural and functional unit of the kidney is shown below.
B
D
F
A
C
i) What is this unit called?
ii) Name the parts A, B, C, D, E.
iii) Briefly explain the functions
that occur in D.
iv) Name two substances absorbed
into blood capillaries from the
fluid that flows through tube A.
v) A urine test of a person revealed
that urine had glucose in it.
What is the disease that person
is having. What are the reasons
for it?
E
^4& Following is a diagram of a model of the human blood circulatory system.
Answer the following questions regarding that.
Head and
neck
Sub clavian
vein
Arms
Sub clavian
artery
a
v
a
c
-
a
n
e
v
r
o
i
r
e
f
n
I
J
I
F
A
C
E
G
B
D
Lung
Lung
Liver
H
Intestine
Kidney
Legs
L
M
i' Name the chambers A to D.
ii Name the following blood vessels
a) E
b) F
(c)
(d)
G
H
iii
In which form part of glucose is
stored in liver?
iv Write the path of a glucose molecule
in blood from the liver to the kidney.
using given letters.
K
v How many times does the glucose
molecule pass through the heart when
transporting to the liver?
vi Write two differences in blood at E
and F.
For free distribution
186
Human body processes
Biology
^5& i) Name the part of brain which involves in the following functions.
a. Higher mental cognitive activities
b. Controlling the heart beat rate
c. Controlling swallowing
d. Controlling functions of the voluntary muscles
(ii) Name the neurons which involve in the peripheral nervous system.
(iii) What is the sub system of the autonomic nervous system that functions
mainly in an emergency.
Digestive system
wdydr ÔrK moaO;sh
\ª£õmkz öuõSv
Technical terms
Digestion
Pharynx
Oesophagus
Salivary glands
Epiglottis
Bile
ÔrKh
.%iksldj
wkakfi%da;h
fÄg .%kaÓ
wmsýyaúldj
ms;
\ª£õk
öuõsøh
PÍ®
EªÌ }º
‰a_USÇÀÁõ´ ‰i
¤zu®
Emulsification
ff;f,daolrKh
SÇ®£õUSuÀ
Peristalsis
Chyme
Appendix
Anus
Faeces
Constipation
Diaphragm
l%udl=xpkh
wdu,ih
WKavql mqÉPh
.=o ud¾.h
u,
u, noaOh
uyd m%dÖrh
Respiratory system
Yajik moaO;sh
Respiration
Lungs
Ribs
Yajikh
fmkye,s
m¾Y=
_ØÖa _¸[PÀ Aø\Ä
Cøµ¨ø£¨ £õS
ShÀ ÁÍ›
SuÁÈ
©»®
©»a]UPÀ
Á°Ø÷Óõmh®
_Áõ\z öuõSv
_Áõ\®
~øµ±µÀ
Â»õöÁß¦
Intercostal muscles
wka;¾ m¾Y=l fmaYs
£ÊÄUQøh uø\PÒ
Aerobic respiration
ijdhq Yajikh
PõØÖa _Áõ\®
187
For free distribution
Biology
Human body processes
Anaerobic respiration
ks¾jdhq Yajikh
PõØÔßÔ¯ _Áõ\®
Nitrogenous excretory
products
khsg%ckSh nysiai%dú
øjH
ø|uµ\ß PÈÄ¨ ö£õ¸Ò
Excretory system
nysiai%dú moaO;sh
PÈÁPØÓÀ öuõSv
Excretion
Kidney
Ureter
Renal vein
Renal artery
Bladder
Urethra
Nephron
Glomerulus
Reabsorption
nysiai%djh
jDlalh
uQ;%%jdysksh
jDlalSh Ysrdj
jDlalSh Ouksh
uQ%;%dYh
uQ;%% ud¾.h
jDlaldKqj
.=Éýldj
m%;sfYdaIKh
Glomerular filtrate
.=Éýld fmrKh
Afferent arteriole
Efferent arteriole
Bowman capsule
Collecting duct
Blood circulation
Blood corpuscles
Blood plasma
wNsjdys Ouksldj
wmjdys Ouksldj
fndauka m%djrh
ix.%dyl kd,sldj
reêr ixirKh
foaydKqq
reêr ma,diauh
Red blood corpuscle
r;= reêrdKq
lKslduh
iqÿ reêrdKqq
PÈÁPØÓÀ
]Ö}µP®
]Ö}º
]Ö}µP |õÍ®
]Ö}µP |õi
]Ö}º¨ø£
]Ö}º ÁÈ
]Ö}µPzv
÷PõÍÄ¸ÁõÚøÁ
«Ò APzxÔg\À
©°ºxøÍ
EmPõÄ|õi
öÁÎUPõÄ |õi
÷©õ©Ûß EøÓ
÷\P›US® SÇõ´
_¸v _Ø÷Óõmh®
S¸vU P»[PÒ
S¸v vµÁÂøÇ¯®
ö\[S¸vU P»®
]Ö©o öPõsh
öÁsSÈ¯®
Granulocytes
Non- granulocycts
Atrium
Ventricle
Bicuspid valve
Pulmonary vein
For free distribution
lKslduh fkdjk iqÿ
reêrdKqq
]Ö©o¯ØÓ öÁs
SÈ¯®
l¾Ksldj
fldaIsldj
oaú;=Kav lmdgh
mqmaMqYSh Ysrdj
188
Cu¯ÁøÓ
÷\õøn¯øÓ
C¸Tº ÁõÀÄ
~øµ±µÀ |õÍ®
Human body processes
Biology
Pulmonary circulation
mqmamqYSh ixirKh
~øµ±µÀ _Ø÷Óõmh®
Lymphatic system
jid moaO;sh
{n}ºz öuõSv
Systemic circulation
ixia:dksl ixirKh
öuõSv _Ø÷Óõmh®
Blood capillaries
Systemic artery
Arterial system
Venous system
reêr flaYkd,sld
ixia:dksl Ouksh
Ouks moaO;sh
Ysrd moaO;sh
S¸v ©°ºxøÍU SÇõ´
öuõSv¨ ö£¸|õi
|õiz öuõSv
|õÍzöuõSv
Coronary thrombosis
lsÍgl f;%dïfndaish
•i²¸ xöµõ®÷£õ]ì
Co-ordination
Homeostasis
Reflex arc
iudfhdackh
iuiaÓ;sh
m%;Sl pdmh
m%;Sl l%shd
Reflex actions
Central nervous system uOH iakdhq moaO;sh
Autonomic nervous
system
iajhx idOl
iakdhq moaO;sh
Parasympathetic system
m%;Hdkqfõ.S
iakdhq moaO;sh
Cø¯£õUP®
J¸^ºzvh{ø»
öuÔ¨¦ ÂÀ
öuÔÂøÚ
ø©¯ |µ®¦z öuõSv
ußÚõm] |µ®¦z
öuõSv
£µõ£›Ä |µ®¦z öuõSv
Sympathetic system
wkqfõ.S iakdhq moaO;sh
£›Ä |µ®¦z öuõSv
Endocrine system
wka;rdi¾. moaO;sh
APg_µUS¢ öuõSv
189
For free distribution
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
07
Acids, bases and salts are used for various activities in our day to day life. To
inquire into your prior knowledge about acids, bases and salts, do the following
assignment.
Assignment - 7.1
Given below are several substances which we frequently use in our day to day
life. Classify them as acids, bases and salts and tabulate.
Lime juice, Jeewani solution, antacid tablets, milk of magnesia, toothpaste,
vinegar, salt, lime, soap, vitamin C tablets, saline solution
7.1 Acids
When you were answering the assignment 7.1 above, you could have classified
lime juice, vinegar and vitamin C in that list under the acids.
You have used various acids in the laboratory experiments also. Hydrochloric acid
(HCl), nitric acid (HNO3) and sulphuric acid (H2SO4) are some acids that are often
used in the laboratory.
Figure 7.1 - Some acids that are being frequently used
When considering the formulae of the above acids it is clear that hydrogen (H) is a
component element in all those acids.
² What is an acid@
An acid is a compound that releases hydrogen ions (H+) in an aqueous medium.
Hydrochloric acid ionises as follows in the aqueous medium and releases H+ ions.
For free distribution
190
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
HCl (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl- (aq)
Based on the strength of releasing H+ ions in the aqueous medium, acids are
classified as strong acids and weak acids.
² Strong acids
The acids that release H+ ions by complete ionisation in aqueous medium are
strong acids. It means that all such acid molecules are dissociated into H+ ions and
the corresponding negative ions in water. For example, in an aqueous solution of
hydrochloric acid which is a strong acid, there are only H+ ions and Cl- ions but no
free HCl molecules.
Given below are a few examples for some strong acids and how they ionise in the
aqueous medium.
• Hydrochloric acid (HCl)
HCl (aq)
H+ (aq) + Cl- (aq)
• Sulphuric acid (H2SO4)
191
H2SO4 (aq)
2H+ (aq) + SO4
2- (aq)
• Nitric acid (HNO3)
HNO3 (aq)
H+ (aq) + NO3
-(aq)
² Weak acids
The acids which release H+ ions in aqueous medium by incomplete or partial
ionisation are called weak acids. This means that in aqueous medium, only a fraction
of such acid molecules are dissociated into H+ ions and relevant negative ions. The
unionised molecules remain as molecules themselves in aqueous solution.
Examples for weak acids:
Acetic acid (CH3COOH)
Carbonic acid (H2CO3)
Phosphoric acid (H3PO4)
Most of the acids in laboratory stores are concentrated acids. Dilute acids of
required concentration can be prepared by mixing such concentrated acids with
water. Acids of low concentration are known as dilute acids.
191
For free distribution
Chemistry
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
² Properties of acids
³ Pay your attention to the warning symbol in Figure 7.2
seen in the label of the bottles containing concentrated
acids. This is a warning about the corrosive nature
of the relevant chemical. That is, when they come
into contact with substances like wood, metals or
cloth they corrode them and if spilled on the skin,
they cause severe burns. This shows that acids have
corrosive properties.
Figure 7.2
³ Recall the taste of lime juice. It is sour. A common feature of acids is that they
have a characteristic sour taste.
Caution: You should not taste the acids used in the laboratory.
³ Dilute acids react with metals above hydrogen in the reactivity series forming
the salt of the metal and hydrogen gas.
Mg (s) + 2HCl (aq)
MgCl2 (aq) + H2
(g)
³ Think back on the experiment carried out to prepare carbon dioxide gas in the
laboratory. Carbon dioxide was prepared by adding diluted hydrochloric acid to
calcium carbonate.
CaCO3 (s) + 2HCl (aq)
CaCl2 (aq) + H2O (l) + CO2
(g)
Production of carbon dioxide by reacting with carbonates/bicarbonates is a
characteristic feature of acids.
³ Acids react with bases to form salts and water.
The salt sodium sulphate (Na2SO4) and water are formed as the products of the
following acid - base reaction.
H2SO4 (aq) + 2NaOH (aq)
Na2SO4 (aq) + 2H2O (l)
³ Acids turn the colour of blue litmus red. This is a simple test used to identify
acids.
For free distribution
192
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
² Uses of some acids
Chemistry
• Hydrochloric acid
³ Removal of rust in steel objects
³ Making gelatin from bony materials in food technology
³ Making aqua regia ( aqua regia is a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and
concentrated hydrochloric acid mixed in the proportion of 1 : 3. Aqua regia is
used to dissolve metals like gold and platinum)
• Sulphuric acid
³ Production of fertilizers such as ammonium sulphate and triple superphosphate
³ Making battery acid ( Battery acid is diluted sulphuric acid)
³ Production of paints, plastics and detergents
³ Concentrated sulphuric acid is used as a dehydrating agent
³ Drying gases (For drying a gas, the relevant gas is bubbled through concentrated
sulphuric acid)
193
• Acetic acid
³ Processing food where vinegar is used
³ Coagulation of rubber latex
³ Production of photographic films
³ Used in the paper industry
³ Production of synthetic threads in textile industry
7.2 Bases
Pay your attention to the substances classified under bases in the table prepared
during assignment 7.1. Milk of magnesia, toothpaste, soap and lime are examples
for bases.
Many bases are encountered as solids. Ammonia is a gas showing basic properties.
Aqueous solutions prepared by dissolving bases in water are used in laboratory
experiments. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH) and ammonia
solution (NH4OH) can be given as the bases frequently used in the laboratory.
193
For free distribution
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Chemistry
Figure 7.3 - Some frequently used bases
² What is a base@
A base is a chemical compound that increases the hydroxyl ion (OH-) concentration
of an aqueous solution. For instance, in aqueous solution, sodium hydroxide
(NaOH) ionises as follows and contributes to raise the OH- ion concentration.
NaOH (aq)
Na+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
² Strong bases
The bases that completely ionise in aqueous solution are called strong bases.
Examples for some strong bases and how they ionise in aqueous solution are given
below.
• Sodium hydroxide
NaOH (aq)
Na+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
• Potassium hydroxide
KOH (aq)
K+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
² Weak bases
The bases which partially ionise in aqueous solution are known as weak bases.
Ex : Ammonia solution (NH4OH)
² Properties of bases
³ They have a slimy texture as in soap.
Caution : Do not touch bases in the laboratory.
³ Bases react with acids to give salts and water.
2NaOH (aq) + H2SO4 (aq)
Na2SO4 (aq) + 2H2O (l)
³ Bases turn red litmus blue. This is a simple test used to identify bases.
Of the bases, those that readily dissolve in water are called alkalis.
For free distribution
194
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
Ex ( Sodium hydroxide (NaOH)
Potassium hydroxide (KOH)
Ammonia solution (NH4OH)
² Uses of some bases
• Sodium hydroxide
³ Production of soap, paper, artificial silk and paints
³ Used in the laboratory as a strong base
³ Refining petroleum products
• Magnesium hydroxide
³ Magnesium hydroxide suspension (milk of magnesia) is used as an antacid to
relieve gastritis (acidity in stomach)
³ Purification of molasses in sugar industry
Identification of acids and bases by indicators
195
Activity 7.1
Identification of acids and bases by indicators
Materials required : Blue litmus, red litmus, methyl orange, phenolphthalein,
lime juice, dilute hydrochloric acid, dilute sulphuric acid, vinegar, dilute sodium
hydroxide solution, soap solution
Add the given indicators to the solutions given above and record the observations.
Table 7.1
Solution
Litmus
red/blue
Methyl
orange
Phenolphthalein
Dilute hydrochloric acid
Lime juice
Dilute sulphuric acid
Vinegar
Dilute sodium hydroxide
Soap solution
195
For free distribution
Chemistry
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
Compare your observations with the following table and identify the relevant
solution as an acid or a base.
Table 7.2
Indicator
Acid colour
Base colour
Litmus
Phenolphthalein
Methyl orange
Red
Colouress
Red
Blue
Pink
Yellow
Identification of acids and bases by indicators is not a very accurate method.
Moreover, by using it, a value for the strength of acids or bases cannot be obtained.
Indicators help to identify a given substance as an acid or a base approximately.
² pH scale
The pH scale is used to indicate how acidic or basic a given solution is. The scale
generally consists of a series of numbers from 0 to 14. Each number corresponds
to a colour.
Acidic
Neutral
Basic
Figure 7.4 - pH scale and colour code of pH papers
According to this scale the pH value of neutral substances such as water is 7. The
pH value of acidic solutions is less than 7 whereas the pH value of basic solutions
is greater than 7. Acidity decreases from 0 to 6 while the basicity increases from
8 to 14.
² pH papers
Like the litmus papers, these are available in the form of books or rolls in the
laboratory. These have been prepared by mixing several indicators. The pH value
can be found by dipping a pH paper in the relevant solution and comparing the
colour of the paper with the colour code. Accordingly, the acidity, basicity or the
neutrality of the solution can be identified. Further, it gives an idea about the strength
of the acid or the base.
For free distribution
196
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
7.3 Salts
The common salt (NaCl) that we use in our day to day life is a salt. The Jeewani
solution given during ailing conditions such as diarrhoea and the saline solution
given to patients are mixtures containing salts.
Chemistry
Acids react with bases to form salts.
Ex (¡ Hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium hydroxide forming sodium
chloride.
NaOH (aq) + HCl (aq)
NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)
Hydrochloric acid reacts with potassium hydroxide to form potassium
chloride.
KOH (aq) + HCl (aq)
Nitric acid upon reacting with magnesium hydroxide gives magnesium
nitrate.
KCl (aq) + H2O (l)
Mg(OH)2 (aq) + 2HNO3 (aq)
Mg(NO3)2 (aq) + 2H2O (l)
Depending on the strength of the acid or the base reacting, the salt shows acidic,
basic or neutral properties.
197
Ex ( The salts formed by the reaction between a strong acid and a strong base show
neutral properties.
Sodium hydroxide is a strong base. Hydrochloric acid is a strong acid. Sodium
chloride formed by the reaction between them is a neutral salt.
NaOH (aq) + HCl (aq)
NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)
Salts are crystalline, solid compounds. Most of the salts dissolve in water. Generally
salts have high melting points and boiling points.
² Uses of some salts
• Sodium chloride
³ Used to flavour food during their preparation
³ Used as a food preservative
³ Used to produce chemicals such as chlorine and
hydrochloric acid, to produce sodium hydroxide to
produce sodium carbonate by solvay process, to
glaze earthenware, to make soap and also used in
tanning
Figure 7.5 - Sodium chloride
197
For free distribution
Acids, Bases and Salts
• Copper sulphate
Chemistry
Chemistry
² Used as a fungicide in agriculture
² Used in making chemical reagents (Benedict solution
and Fehling solution)
² Used in electroplating
² Used in paint industry
Figure 7.6
Copper sulphate
7.4 Neutralisation
You know that antacid tablets which contain a basic substance are used to relieve
the discomfort caused by the acidity in stomach. Have you inquired into the reason
for it?
You have studied the fact that when acids react with bases, salts and water are
produced. Let's consider the reaction between hydrochloric acid and sodium
hydroxide again.
HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq)
NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)
Let's investigate how water was formed as a product in the above reaction. The H+
ions released by the ionisation of the acid combine with the OH- ions given by the
ionisation of the base to form water molecules. it can be represented by a chemical
equation as follows.
H+ (aq) + OH- (aq)
H2O (l)
In all acid - base reactions, the above common reaction occurs. This process is
known as neutralisation.
Neutralisation is the combination of H+ ions released by an acid with OH- ions
released by a base to form water molecules.
Hence, when an acid reatcs with a base their acidic properties as well as the basic
properties disappear.
For free distribution
198
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
² Applications of the acid - base neutralisation reactions
³ Milk of magnesia or such an antacid (a weak base) is used to neutralise the
Chemistry
acidity in the stomach.
³ Basic substances such as ash and quicklime (calcium oxide) are added to soil to
reduce soil acidity.
³ Bee sting is painful because of an acidic poisonous substance injected into the
skin. By applying a weak basic substance such as baking soda (NaHCO3) or
calcium carbonate (CaCO3) on the place of the sting, the pain is relieved.
³ Wasp sting is basic. Application of a weak, dilute acid such as lime juice or
vinegar on the place of sting reduces the venomous nature as well as the pain.
Summary
² The substances that release H+ ions in aqueous solution are called acids.
² The substances that increase the OH- ion concentration in aqueous solution
are known as bases.
² An acid reacts with a base to form salt and water.
² The acids that release H+ ions undergoing complete ionisation in aqueous
solution are strong acids whereas the acids that release H+ ions by partial
ionisation are weak acids.
199
199
² The bases that increase the OH- concentration undergoing complete ionisation
in aqueous medium are called strong bases. The bases that increase the OH-
concentration by partial ionisation in aqueous solution are weak bases.
² Both acids and bases change the colour of indicators.
² An acid has a low pH value while a base has a higher pH value.
² Acids react with many metals liberating hydrogen gas. Acids react with
carbonates or bicarbonates with the evolution of carbon dioxide gas.
² By reacting an acid with a base, salts are formed.
² A salt shows acidic or basic or neutral properties. It depends on the strength
of the acid or the base contributed to form the salt.
² In the reaction between acids and bases, the combination of H+ ions released
by the acid with the OH- ions released by the base, to form water molecules
is called neutralisation.
² Hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid and acetic acid are frequently used acids
for various purposes.
² Sodium hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide are two bases used in various
tasks.
² Sodium chloride and copper sulphate are two salts used for various tasks.
199
For free distribution
Acids, Bases and Salts
Exercises
01' Complete the following sentences.
Chemistry
Chemistry
i. Sodium hydroxide and ................................ acid react to form sodium chloride
and water.
ii. Calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid react liberating ...............................
gas.
iii. Potassium hydroxide and sulphuric acid react to form ................................
and........................... .
iv. ................................ acid and ................................ hydroxide react giving
magnesium nitrate.
v. ................................ acid reacts with magnesium liberating ................................
gas and forming the salt ................................
02' You are provided with three unlabelled solutions of sodium hydroxide, dilute
hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride. You are given only blue litmus papers.
Using only them how do you identify the above three solutions?
03' Fill in the blanks with the solutions selected from the following list of solutions.
H2SO4(aq), HCl (aq), NH3(aq), H2O(l), Ca(OH)2 (aq), CH3COOH(aq)
................................ and ................................ turn red litmus blue.
i.
ii.
................................ and ................................ act as strong acids.
iii.
In ................................ and ................................, pH is greater than 7.
iv. Vinegar used at home is diluted................................ .
v.
................................ causes severe burns in the skin when spilled.
vi. Calcium sulphate salt is formed by the reaction between ............................
and ................................ .
04.
i. Arrange the following solutions in the ascending order of pH.
sodium hydroxide, sulphuric acid, water, vinegar
ii. Of the solutions dilute hydrochloric acid, dilute sodium hydroxide and acetic
acid, which does not react with sodium carbonate?
For free distribution
200
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chemistry
iii. When somebody comes into contact with the plant (kahambiliya), it causes
itching and a severe burning sensation due to formic acid it contains. Suggest
a suitable substance to apply on the skin to relieve that sensation.
Acid
base
Salt
Neutralisation
Strong acid
weak acid
Strong base
weak base
pH scale
pH papers
Glossary
wï,h
Niauh
,jK
WÞiSkslrKh
m%n, wï,h
ÿn, wï,h
m%n, Niauh
ÿn, Niauh
pH mßudKh
pH lvÞis
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Aª»®
‰»®
E¨¦
|k{ø»¯õUP®
ÁßÚª»®
ö©ßÚª»®
Áß ‰»®
ö©ß ‰»®
pH AÍÄzvmh®
pH uõÒ
201
201
For free distribution
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with
Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
08
Recall again about the evidences you have learnt in grade 10 to ensure that a reaction
has taken place. Do the following activity to study further about it.
Activity 8.1
Materials required ; - Two small beakers about 100 cm3 , A thermometer, a glass
rod, solid sodium hydroxide (NaOH), solid ammonium chloride
(NH4Cl)
Method; - Add about half full of water to a beaker, measure its temperature and
note it down. Add a little amount of solid sodium hydroxide to the same beaker,
stir with the glass rod and again measure and record the temperature. State your
observations.
Fill half of a beaker with water and record its temperature. Add a little amount
of solid ammonium chloride to this beaker. Stir with the glass rod and record the
temperature again. State your observations.
It can be observed that when solid sodium hydroxide dissolves in water the
temperature rises whereas when solid ammonium chloride dissolves in water, the
temperature falls. The reason for the temperature changes happening in the above
two instances is the heat changes accompanying them.
What is the reason for the increase in temperature when solid sodium hydroxide
dissolves in water? The temperature increases because of the loss of heat.
Why did the temperature decrease when solid ammonium chloride was dissolved
in water?
In this case, temperature decreased because of the absorption of heat.
The temperature change can be considered as a measure of the amount of heat
either evolved or absorbed.
In order to explore further about the heat changes occurring in a chemical reaction,
let us conduct the following activity.
For free distribution
202
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
Activity 8.2
Materials required: - A small beaker, a piece of magnesium strip, dilute
hydrochloric acid, a thermometer
Method: - Add about 10 cm3 of dilute hydrochloric acid to a small beaker and
measure its temperature. Add a piece of magnesium ribbon about 2 cm long
into it. Measure the temperature at the end of the reaction again. Record your
observations.
increased. That means, when
temperature
When magnesium metal reacts with hydrochloric acid,
has
lost.
The chemical reactions happening with the evolution of heat are called
exothermic reactions. Exothermic reactions can be represented simply as
follows.
this reaction happens heat
the
is
Reactants
Products + Heat
The exothermic reaction studied in activity 8.2 can be represented by the following
equation.
Mg (s) + 2HCl (aq)
MgCl2 (aq) + H2 (g) + Heat
The reason for the evolution of heat in an exothermic reaction is that the energy
contained in the products is less than the energy content of the reactants.
An exothermic reaction can be illustrated by an energy level diagram as follows.
Energy
Energy
Reactants
Mg(s) + HCl(aq)
Energy is
Released
Energy is
Released
Products
MgCl2(aq)+ H2(g)
Figure 8.1 Energy level diagram for an exothermic reaction
203
For free distribution
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
Chemistry
Activity 8.3
Materials required : - A small beaker, a solution of citric acid, a solution of sodium
bicarbonate
Method : - Add about 10 cm3 of the citric acid solution to a small beaker and record
its temperature. Record the temperature of the sodium bicarbonate solution also.
Add about 10 cm3 of the sodium bicarbonate solution to the beaker containing
citric acid, stir and note the temperature. State your observations.
When the reaction between citric acid and sodium bicarbonate occurs, the
temperature decreases. The reason for this decrease in temperature is the absorption
of heat during the reaction. The reactions taking place with the absorption of
heat are known as endothermic reactions.
An endothermic reaction can be simply represented as follows.
Reactants + Heat
Products
The reason for the absorption of heat during an endothermic reaction is the fact that
the energy in the products is greater than the energy in the reactants.
An endothermic reaction can be represented by an energy level diagram as follows.
Energy
Products
Reactants
Energy is absorbed.
Figure 8.2 Energy level diagram for an endothermic reaction
Let's do the following activity to find the energy change of a chemical reaction
quantitatively.
For free distribution
204
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
Activity 8.4
Experimental determination of the heat change of the reaction between sodium
hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl)
Materials required : - 50 cm3 of 2 mol dm-3 sodium hydroxide solution, 50 cm3
of 2 mol dm-3 hydrochloric acid solution, two 100 cm3 beakers,
a thermometer of range 0-100 0C, a polystyrene cup, a glass
rod
Method : -
glass rod
mixture
thermometer
lid
polystyrene cup
To two beakers, measure 50 cm3 of the sodium hydroxide solution and 50 cm3 of
the hydrochloric acid solution separately using the measuring cylinder. With the
thermometer, measure the initial temperatures of the two solutions.
(After measuring the temperature of the solution of the base, wash the thermometer
before measuring the temperature of the acid solution . Mix these two solutions in
a polystyrene cup, stir with the glass rod and record the maximum temperature.
205
For free distribution
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
The heat change associated with the reaction can be calculated using the following
equation.
Chemistry
Q = m c θ
m = Mass of the substance accompanying the exchange of heat
c = Specific heat capacity of the substance related to the heat change
θ = Temperature change in the mixture (maximum temperature - initial temperature)
If the temperatures of the solutions of the base and acid are different, their mean
should be taken as the initial temperature.
This calculation is based on the assumption that the entire quantity of heat of the
reaction between sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid is used to raise the
temperature of 100 cm3 of the solution. Since dilute solutions were used for mixing,
it is also assumed that the specific heat capacity of the solution is equal to that of
water and the density of the solution is equal to that of water.
Specific heat capacity of water
= 4200 J kg-1 0C-1
Density of water
Mass of 100 cm3 of water
= 1 g cm-3
= 100 g
Let us assume that the observed temperature change in the experiment is 10 0C
Q = m c θ
=
100
1000
kg x 4200 J kg-1 0C-1 x 10 0C
= 4200 J
The experiment gives the heat change that results when 50 cm3 of the 2 mol dm-3
sodium hydroxide solution reacts with 50 cm3 of 2 mol dm-3 hydrochloric acid
solution.
For free distribution
206
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
E x t r a k n o w l e d g e
This experiment gives the quantity of heat evolved when the amount of moles of
sodium hydroxide in 50 cm3 of the solution reacts with the amount of moles of
hydrochloric acid in 50 cm3 of the solution used.
Amount of moles of NaOH in 50 cm3 of the
2 mol dm-3 NaOH solution
1000 × 50 mol
=
2
Amount of moles of HCl in 50 cm3 of the =
2 mol dm-3 HCl solution
2
1000
× 50 mol
= 0.1 mol
= 0.1 mol
Referring to this, the quantity of heat that evolves when 1 mol of sodium
hydroxide reacts with 1 mol of hydrochloric acid can be calculated.
The quantity of heat released when
0.1 mol of NaOH reacts with 0.1 mol of HCl
Quantity of heat released when 1.0 mol of
NaOH reacts with 1.0 mol of HCl
= 4.2 kJ
4.2 kJ
0.1 mol
=
= 42 kJ mol-1
This is the heat of reaction of the reaction between sodium hydroxide and
hydrochloric acid.(This is an experimental value).
When conducting this experiment loss of heat to the surroundings and absorption of
heat by the container occur. Neglecting these leads to an error in the calculation. To
minimize it, a thermally insulating polystyrene cup is used. To keep the temperature
uniform throughout the mixture, the mixture should be stirred well with a stirrer or
a glass rod.
In the above experiment, we determined the heat change associated with the reaction
between aqueous sodium hydroxide and aqueous hydrochloric acid.
HCl (aq) + NaOH(s)
NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)
The above experiment can be carried out using solid sodium hydroxide (NaOH (s))
too. But the heat change here is different from the previous value.
207
For free distribution
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Therefore, when expressing the heat change accompanying a reaction, the physical
state of the reactants and the products should be indicated (Solid, liquid, gas,
aqueous)
Chemistry
Exothermic and endothermic reactions are important in various activities in day
to day life. We meet our energy requirements by burning fuels. Coal, bio gas
(methane), and petrol (a mixture of hydrocarbons) are few examples. The energy
liberated during the combustion of these fuels are used for various tasks such as
running vehicles and operating machinery in factories. Combustion of fuels is an
exothermic reaction. The neutralisation reactions taking place between acids and
bases are also exothermic reaction. Cellular respiration taking place in live bodies
are also exothermic reactions.
In the production of slaked lime, water is added to quicklime. During this process,
lot of heat is liberated. This is also an exothermic reaction.
CaO (s) + H2O (l)
Ca(OH) 2 (s)
Next, let us consider about endothermic processes. You have studied the
photosynthesis happening in green plants. In this, simple sugars are produced by
absorbing solar energy. It is an endothermic process.
6CO2 (g) + 6H2O (l)
solar energy
chlorophyll
C6H12O6 (s) + 6O2 (g)
Thermal decomposition of many chemical compounds is also an endothermic
process. Consider the production of quicklime by burning limestone. This reaction
also absorbs heat.
CaCO3 (s)
CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
Summary
• During every chemical reaction, a heat change also occurs.
• Reactions during which heat is released to the surroundings are called
exothermic reactions.
• Reactions in which heat is absorbed from the surroundings are called
endothermic reactions.
• The amount of heat released or absorbed during a reaction can be calculated
using the equation Q = mcθ
For free distribution
208
Chemistry
Heat Changes Associated with Chemical Reactions
Chemistry
Exercises
(a) What do you mean by an exothermic reaction and an endothermic
01'
reaction
(b) Are the following reactions exothermic or endothermic?
1.
Burning of a candle
Putting a piece of sodium into water
2.
3. Dissolving the fertilizer urea in water
4. Adding glucose to water
5. Adding water to quicklime
(c) The quantity of heat evolved during the following reaction is 822 kJ mol-1
2 Na (s) + Cl2 (g)
2 NaCl(s)
Represent this using an energy level diagram.
02' 40 cm3 of a vinegar (dilute acetic acid) solution was mixed with 60 cm3 of a
very dilute solution of lime water. (calcium hydroxide)Then, the temperature
of the mixture increased by 10 0C
i) Calculate the heat change occurred during the above reaction
ii) What were the assumptions you made in (i) above? Is this reaction exothermic
or endothermic?
Density of water = 1000 kg m-3
Specific heat capacity of water = 4200 J kg-1 0C-1
exothermic reaction
endothermic reaction
-
-
;dmodhl m%;sl%shdj
;dm wjfYdaIl m%;sl%shdj
-
-
¦ÓöÁ¨£zuõUP®
APöÁ¨£zuõUP®
Glossary
209
For free distribution
Introduction
This textbook was compiled by the Educational Publications Department in
accordance with the syllabus prepared by the National Institute of Education for
the use of Grade 11 students in the Sri Lankan school system with effect from 2016.
An effort has made here to arrange the subject content to suit the national educational
goals, common national competencies, the objectives of teaching science and the
content of the syllabus .
The subject of science directs the student towards a more active learning process in
a manner as to develop knowledge, skills and attitudes needed for a developmental
scientific thought.
Each chapter is compiled based on the three main subject areas that comprise the
Science subject; Biology, Chemistry and Physics. Pictures, charts, graphs, activities
and assignments are included to enable the easy understanding of the related
concepts of the subject.
At the end of each chapter, a summary was included and it provides the opportunity
to identify the basic concepts of each chapter and to revise the subject matter.
Furthermore, there is a series of exercises at the end of each chapter. It will contribute
to measure the expected learning outcomes through a self evaluation.
Activities, self evaluative questions, solved examples, assignments and exercises
are planned in a manner as to develop the higher order skills such as It enables
the students to develop knowledge as well as the higher order skills such as
comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
For the purpose of directing the student to study further about the subject matter,
more information is included in the “For extra knowledge”. It is given only to
broaden the subject area of the child and certainly not to ask questions at term tests.
Some of the activities mentioned in the textbook could be performed at home and
some of them should be performed in the science laboratory of the school. Activity
based learning helps to create a liking towards learning science in the students and
it will easily establish the concepts .
We would like to bestow our sincere thanks on Professor T.R.Ariyarathne,
University of Colombo and the Chief Project Officer(Retired) W.D.Wijesinghe of
the National Institute of Education and the In service advisor L.Gamini Jayasuriya
of the Divisional education office-Wennapuwa and the senior lecturer Asoka de
Silva of the National Institute of Education who is on leave for Ph.D.
Board of Writers and Editors
For free distribution
210