CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
POETRY
1. To the Nile
2. A Bird Came Down the Walk
3. The Eagle
4. To the Evening Star
5. War is Kind
6. The Terrorist,He’s Watching
7. Farewell to Barn and Stack and Tree
8. Breakfast
9. Once Upon a Time
10. I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings
11. Richard Cory
12. Big Match, 1983
13. The Earthen Goblet
14. Father and Son
15. Fear
16. The Clown’s Wife
17. The Camel’s Hump
18. Upside-Down
19. The Huntsman
20. Two’s Company
- John Keats
- Emily Dickinson
- Alfred Lord Tennyson
- William Blake
- Stephen Crane
- Wislawa Szymborska
- A.E. Houseman
- Jacques Prevert
(Translated by Regi Siriwadene)
- Gabrial Okara
- Maya Angelou
- Edwin Arlington Robinson
- Yasmine Gooneratne
- Harindranath Chattopadhyaya
- Cat Stevens
- Gabriela Mistral
(Translated by Doris Dana)
- Johnson Agard
- Rudyard Kipling
- Alexander Kushner
(Translated by Margart Wettin)
- Edward Lowbury
- Raymond Wilson
PROSE
1. The Nightingale and the Rose
- Oscar Wilde
2. An extract from‘Colin Cowdrey Lecture - The Lahore Attack
Kumar Sangakkara
3. The Lumber Room
4. An extract from‘Wave’- A Memoir of Life after the Tsunami
- Saki
DRAMA
1. Twilight of a Crane
2. The Bear
Sonali Deraniyagala
- Yu Zuwa Junji Kinoshita
- Anton Chekhov
Annexure
Proposed term-wise breakdown of the syllabus
Nature
To the Nile
SON of the old moon-mountains African!
Chief of the Pyramid and Crocodile!
We call thee fruitful, and that very while,
A desert fills our seeing’s inward span;
Nurse of swart nations since the world began,
Art thou so fruitful? Or dost thou beguile
Such men to honour thee, who, worn with toil,
Rest for a space ‘twixt Cairo and Decan?
O may dark fancies err! They surely do;
‘Tis ignorance that makes a barren waste
Of all beyond itself, thou dost bedew
Green rushes like our rivers, and dost taste
The pleasant sun-rise, green isles hast thou too,
And to the sea as happily dost haste.
John Keats
A Bird Came Down the Walk
A bird came down the walk:
He did not know I saw;
He bit an angle-worm in halves
And ate the fellow, raw.
And then he drank a dew
From a convenient grass,
And then hopped sidewise to the wall
To let a beetle pass.
He glanced with rapid eyes
That hurried all abroad
They looked like frightened beads, I thought;
He stirred his velvet head
Like one in danger; cautious,
I offered him a crumb,
And he unrolled his feathers
And rowed him softer home
Than oars divide the ocean,
Too silver for a seam,
Or butterflies, off banks of noon,
Leap, plashless, as they swim.
Emily Dickinson
The Eagle (A Fragment)
He clasps the crag with crooked hands;
Close to the sun in lonely lands,
Ring’d with the azure world, he stands.
The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls;
He watches from his mountain walls,
And like a thunderbolt he falls.
Alfred Lord Tennyson
To the Evening Star
THOU fair-hair’d angel of the evening,
Now, whilst the sun rests on the mountains, light
Thy bright torch of love; thy radiant crown
Put on, and smile upon our evening bed!
Smile on our loves, and while thou drawest the
Blue curtains of the sky, scatter thy silver dew
On every flower that shuts its sweet eyes
In timely sleep. Let thy west wind sleep on
The lake; speak silence with thy glimmering eyes,
And wash the dusk with silver. Soon, full soon,
Dost thou withdraw; then the wolf rages wide,
And then the lion glares through the dun forest:
The fleeces of our flocks are cover’d with
Thy sacred dew: protect them with thine influence!
William Blake
Conflict
War is Kind
Do not weep, maiden, for war is kind
Because your lover threw wild hands towards the sky
And the affrighted steed ran on alone
Do not weep
War is kind.
Hoarse, booming drums of the regiment
Little souls who thirst for fight
These men were born to drill and die
The unexplained glory flies above them
Great is the battle god, great and his kingdom
A field where a thousand corpses lie.
Do not weep babe, for war is kind
Because your father tumbled in the yellow trenches
Raged at his breast, gulped and died.
Do not weep
War is kind.
Swift blazing flag of the regiment
Eagle with crest of red and gold
These men were born to drill and die
Point for them the virtue of slaughter
Make plain to them the excellence of killing
And a field where a thousand corpses lie.
Mother whose heart hung humble as a button
On the bright splendid shroud of your son
Do not weep
War is kind
Stephen Crane
The Terrorist, He’s Watching
The bomb in the bar will explode at thirteen twenty.
Now it’s just thirteen sixteen.
There’s still time for some to go in,
And some to come out.
The terrorist has already crossed the street.
That distance keeps him out of danger,
and what a view- just like the movies:
A woman in a yellow jacket, she’s going in.
A man in dark glasses, he’s coming out.
Teenagers in jeans, they’re talking.
Thirteen seventeen and four seconds.
The short one, he’s lucky, he’s getting on a scooter,
but the tall one, he’s going in.
Thirteen seventeen and forty seconds.
That girl, she’s walking along with a green ribbon in her hair.
But then a bus suddenly pulls in front of her.
Thirteen eighteen.
The girl’s gone.
Was she that dumb, did she go in or not,
we’ll see when they carry them out.
Thirteen nineteen.
Somehow no one’s going in.
Another guy, fat, bald, is leaving, though.
Wait a second, looks like he’s looking for something in his
pockets and
at thirteen twenty minus ten seconds
he goes back in for his crummy gloves.
Thirteen twenty exactly.
This waiting, it’s taking forever.
Any second now.
No, not yet.
Yes, now.
The bomb, it explodes.
Wislawa Szymborska
Farewell to Barn and Stack and Tree
“Farewell to barn and stack and tree,
Farewell to Severn shore.
Terence, look your last at me,
For I come home no more.
“The sun burns on the half-mown hill,
By now the blood is dried;
And Maurice amongst the hay lies still
And my knife is in his side.
“My mother thinks us long away;
,Tis time the field were mown.
She had two sons at rising day,
To-night she’ll be alone.
“And here’s a bloody hand to shake,
And oh, man, here’s good-bye;
We’ll sweat no more on scythe and rake,
My bloody hands and I.
“I wish you strength to bring you pride,
And a love to keep you clean,
And I wish you luck, come Lammastide,
At racing on the green.
“Long for me the rick will wait,
And long will wait the fold,
And long will stand the empty plate,
And dinner will be cold.”
A. E. Houseman
Breakfast
He poured coffee
into his cup
he put milk
in his cup of coffee
he put sugar
in his cup of coffee and milk
With his teaspoon
he stirred it
he drank the coffee and milk
and he put down the cup
without speaking to me
He lit
a cigarette
he made rings
with the smoke
he put the ashes
in the ash-tray
without speaking to me
without looking at me
He got up
he put
his hat on his head
he put on
his raincoat
because it was raining
and he went out
in the rain
without a word
without a look.
And I, I put
my head in my hands
and wept.
Jacques Prevert (Translated by Regi Siriwardene)
Society
Once Upon a Time
Once upon a time, son,
they used to laugh with their hearts
and laugh with their eyes;
but now they only laugh with their teeth,
while their ice-block-cold eyes
search behind my shadow.
There was a time indeed
they used to shake hands with their hearts;
but that’s gone, son.
Now they shake hands without hearts
while their left hands search
my empty pockets.
‘Feel at home’. ‘Come again’,
they say, and when I come
again and feel
at home, once, twice,
there will be no thrice-
for then I find doors shut on me.
So I have learnt many things,
I have learned to wear many faces
like dresses – homeface,
office face, street face, host face,cock-
tail face, with all their conforming smiles
like a fixed portrait smile.
And I have learned too
to laugh with only my teeth
and shake hands without my heart.
I have also learned to say ‘Goodbye’
when I mean, ‘Goodriddance!’
to say ‘Glad to see you,’
without being glad; and to say ‘It’s been
nice talking to you,’ after being bored.
But believe me, son,
I want to be what I used to be
when I was like you. I want
to unlearn all these muting things.
Most of all, I want to re-learn
how to laugh, for my laugh in the mirror
shows only my teeth like a snake’s bare fangs!
So show me, son,
how to laugh; show me how
I used to laugh and smile
once upon a time when I was like you.
I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings
Gabriel Okara
The free bird leaps
on the back of the wind
and floats downstream
till the current ends
and dips his wings
in the orange sun rays
and dares to claim the sky.
But a bird that stalks
down his narrow cage
can seldom see through
his bars of rage
his wings are clipped and
his feet are tied
so he opens his throat to sing.
The caged bird sings
with fearful trill
of the things unknown
but longed for still
and his tune is heard
on the distant hill for the caged bird
sings of freedom
The free bird thinks of another breeze
and the trade winds soft through the sighing trees
and the fat worms waiting on a dawn-bright lawn
and he names the sky his own.
But a caged bird stands on the grave of dreams
his shadow shouts on a nightmare scream
his wings are clipped and his feet are tied
so he opens his throat to sing
The caged bird sings
with a fearful trill
of things unknown
but longed for still
and his tune is heard
on the distant hill
for the caged bird
sings of freedom.
Richard Cory
Maya Angelou
Whenever Richard Cory went downtown,
We people on the pavement looked at him;
He was a gentleman from sole to crown,
Clean favored, and imperially slim.
And he was always quietly arrayed,
And he was always human when he talked;
But still he fluttered pulses when he said,
‘Good-morning,’ and he glittered when he walked.
And he was rich - yes, richer than a king ---
And admirably schooled in every grace:
In fine, we thought that he was everything
To make us wish that we were in his place.
So on we worked, and waited for the light,
And went without the meat, and cursed the bread;
And Richard Cory, one calm summer night,
Went home and put a bullet through his head.
Edwin Arlington Robinson
Big Match, 1983
Glimpsing the headlines in the newspapers,
tourists scuttle for cover, cancel their options
on rooms with views of temple and holy mountain.
“Flash point in Paradise.” “Racial pot boils over.”
And even the gone away boy
who had hoped to find lost roots, lost lovers,
lost talent even, out among the palms,
makes timely return giving thanks
that Toronto is quite romantic enough
for his purposes.
Powerless this time to shelter or to share
we strive to be objective, try to trace
the match that lit this sacrificial fire.
the steps by which we reached this ravaged place.
We talk of “Forty Eight” and “Fifty Six”,
of freedom and the treacherous politics
of language; see the first sparks of this hate
fanned into flame in Nineteen Fifty Eight,
yet find no comfort in our neat solution,
no calm abstraction, and no absolution.
The game’s in other hands in any case.
These fires ring factory, and hovel,
and Big Match fever, flaring high and fast,
has both sides in its grip and promises
dizzier scores than any at the oval.
In a tall house dim with old books and pictures
calm hands quit the clamouring telephone.
‘It’s a strange life we’re leading here just now,
not a dull moment. No one can complain
of boredom, that’s for sure. Up all night keeping watch,
and then as curfew ends and your brave lands
dash out at dawn to start another day
of fun, and games, and general jollity,
I send Padmini and the girls to a neighbor’s house.
Who, me? - Oh I’m doing fine. I always was
a drinking man you know and nowadays
I’m stepping up my intake quite a bit,
the general idea being that when those torches
come within fifty feet of this house don’t you see
it won’t be my books that go up first, but me.”
A pause. Then, steady and every bit as clear
as though we are neighbors still as we had been
In Fifty Eight. “Thanks, by the way for ringing.
There’s nothing you can do to help us but
it’s good to know some lines haven’t yet been cut.”
Out of the palmyrah fences of Jaffna
bristle a hundred guns.
Shopfronts in the Pettah, landmarks of our childhood
Curl like old photographs in the flames.
Blood on their khaki uniforms, three boys lie dying;
a crowd looks silently the other way.
Near the wheels of his smashed bicycle
at the corner of Duplication Road a child lies dead
and two policemen look the other way
as a stout man, sweating with fear, falls to his knees
beneath a bo-tree in a shower of sticks and stones
flung by his neighbor’s hands.
The joys of childhood, friendships of our youth
ravaged by pieties and politics
screaming across our screens her agony
at last exposed, Sri Lanka burns alive.
Yasmine Gooneratne
The Earthern Goblet
O silent goblet red from head to heel,
How did you feel
When you were being twirled
Upon the Potter’s wheel
Before the Potter gave you to the world?
‘I felt a conscious impulse in my clay
To break away
From the great Potter’s hand that burned so warm.
I felt vast
Feeling of sorrow to be cast
Into my present form.
‘Before that fatal hour
That saw me captive on the Potter’s wheel
And cast into this crimson goblet-sleep,
I used to feel
The fragrant friendship of a little flower
Whose root was in my bosom buried deep.
‘The Potter has drawn out the living breath of me
And given me a form which is the death of me.
My past unshapely natural state was best
With just one flower flaming through my breast.’
Harindranath Chattopadhyaya
Father and Son
Father
It’s not time to make a change,
Just relax, take it easy.
You’re still young, that’s your fault,
There’s so much you have to know.
Find a girl, settle down,
If you want you can marry.
Look at me, I am old, but I’m happy.
I was once like you are now, and I know that it’s not easy,
To be calm when you’ve found something going on.
But take your time, think a lot,
Why, think of everything you’ve got.
For you will still be here tomorrow, but your dreams may not.
How can I try to explain, cause when I do he turns away again.
It’s always been the same, same old story.
From the moment I could talk I was ordered to listen.
Now there’s a way and I know that I have to go away.
I know I have to go.
Father
It’s not time to make a change,
Just sit down, take it slowly.
You’re still young, that’s your fault,
There’s so much you have to go through.
Find a girl, settle down,
If you want, you can marry.
Look at me, I am old, but I’m happy.
All the times that I’ve cried, keeping all the things I knew inside,
It’s hard, but it’s harder to ignore it.
If they were right, I’d agree, but it’s them they know, not me,
Now there’s a way and I know that I have to go away.
I know I have to go.
Cat Stevens
I don’t want them to turn
my little girl into a swallow.
She would fly far away into the sky
and never fly again to my straw bed,
or she would nest in the eaves
where I could not comb her hair.
I don’t want them to turn
my little girl into a swallow.
I don’t want them to make
my little girl a princess.
In tiny golden slippers
how could she play on the meadow?
And when night came, no longer
would she sleep at my side.
I don’t want them to make
my little girl a princess.
And even less do I want them
one day to make her queen.
They would put her on a throne
where I could not go to see her.
And when nighttime came
I could never rock her …
I don’t want them to make
my little girl a queen!
Gabriela Mistral (Translated by Doris Dana)
The Clown’s Wife
About my husband, the clown,
what could I say?
On stage, he’s a different person.
Up there he’s a king on a throne,
but at home you should hear him moan.
The moment he walks through that door
without that red nose and them funny clothes,
he seems to have the world on his shoulder.
I do me best to cheer him up, poor soul.
I juggle with eggs, I turn cartwheels,
I tell jokes, I do me latest card trick,
I even have a borrow of his red nose.
But he doesn’t say exactly how he feels,
doesn’t say what’s bothering him inside.
Just sits there saying almost to himself:
‘O life, ah life,
what would I do without this clown of a wife?’
Johnson Agard
Humour
The Camel’s Hump
The Camel’s hump is an ugly lump
Which well you may see at the Zoo;
But uglier yet is the hump we get
From having too little to do.
Kiddies and grown-ups too-oo-oo,
If we haven’t enough to do-oo-oo,
We get the hump-
Cameelious hump-
The hump that is black and blue!
We climb out of bed with a frouzly head,
And a snarly-yarly voice.
We shiver and scowl and we grunt and we
growl
At our bath and our boots and our toys;
And there ought to be a corner for me
(And I know there is one for you)
When we get the hump-
Cameelious hump-
The hump that is black and blue!
The cure for this ill is not to sit still,
Or frowst with a book by the fire; But to take a large hoe and a shovel also,
And dig till you gently perspire;
And then you will find that the sun and the
wind,
And the Djinn of the Garden too,
Have lifted the hump-
The horrible hump-
The hump that is black and blue!
I get it as well as you-oo-oo-
If I haven’t enough to do-oo-oo!
We all get the hump-
Cameelious hump-
Kiddies and grown-ups too!
Rudyard Kipling
Upside-Down
Once there lived an Upside-Down
Who was the talk of all the town.
If he was told to turn to right
He turned to left out of spite.
If he went sailing in a boat
No one could make him understand
Why he seemed to be afloat
And what had happened to the land.
He read his letters backside-fore,
And wrote his letters backside-fore.
So if a “ton” was to be read
He read it “not,” the dunder-head!
All his life he was afraid
To cross a bridge. He’d always wade
(Unless the water was too deep
Or the embankment was too steep.)
He went into a restaurant;
The waiter said, “What do you want?”
He said, “I’d like a pair of socks
With clocks on them, and in a box.”
The circus came to town one day;
Of course he went without delay.
And everyone said Upside-Down
Was funnier than the circus clown.
Just yesterday the postman brought
A letter to him from his aunt:
“Shall I read it? P’raps I ought,
P’raps I will, p’raps I can’t.”
He eyed it this way, eyed it that,
Then he stuck it in his hat.
His auntie wrote, “Dearest boy,
All you do is to annoy:
Wearing flannels when it’s hot,
Going naked when it’s not!
You must behave as others do
If they’re to have respect for you!”
Alexander Kushner (translated by Margaret Wettin)
The Huntsman
Kagwa hunted the lion,
Through bush and forest went his spear.
One day he found the skull of a man
And said to it, ‘How did you come here?’
The skull opened its mouth and said,
‘Talking brought me here.’
Kagwa hurried home;
Went to the king’s chair and spoke:
‘In the forest I found a talking skull.’
The king was silent. Then he said slowly,
‘Never since I was born of my mother
Have I seen or heard of a skull which spoke.’
The king called out his guards:
‘Two of you now go with him
And find this talking skull;
But if his tale is a lie
And the skull speaks no word,
This Kagwa himself must die’
They rode into the forest;
For days and nights they found nothing.
At last they saw the skull; Kagwa
Said to it, “How did you come here?”
The skull said nothing. Kagwa implored,
But the skull said nothing.
The guards said, ‘Kneel down.’
They killed him with sword and spear.
Then the skull opened its mouth;
‘Huntsman, how did you come here?’
And the dead man answered,
‘Talking brought me here.’
Edward Lowbury
Two’s Company
The sad story of a man who didn’t believe in ghosts
They said the house was haunted, but
He laughed at them and said, ‘Tut, tut!
I’ve never heard such tittle-tattle
As ghosts that groan and chains that rattle;
And just to prove I’m in the right,
Please leave me here to spend the night.’
They left him just as dusk was falling
With a hunchback moon and screech-owls calling.
But what is that? Outside it seemed
As if chains rattled, someone screamed!
Come, come, it’s merely nerves, he’s certain
(But just the same, he draws the curtain).
The stroke of twelve - but there’s no clock!
He shuts the door and turns the lock
(Of course, he knows that no one’s there,
But no harm’s done by taking care!);
Someone’s outside - the silly joker,
(He may as well pick up the poker!)
That noise again! He checks the doors,
Shutters the windows, makes a pause
To seek the safest place to hide -
(The cupboard’s strong - he creeps inside).
‘Not that there’s anything to fear!’
He tells himself, when at his ear
A voice breathes softly, ‘How do you do!
I am a ghost. Pray who are you?’
Raymond Wilson
Short Stories and Non-fiction
The Nightingale and the Rose - Oscar Wilde
“SHE said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses,”
cried the young Student, “but in all my garden there is no red rose.”
From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and
she looked out through the leaves, and wondered.
“No red rose in all my garden!” he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled
with tears. “Ah, on what little things does happiness depend! I have read
all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of philosophy are
mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made wretched.”
“Here at last is a true lover,” said the Nightingale. “Night after night
have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I
told his story to the stars, and now I see him. His hair is dark as the
hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but
passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal
upon his brow.”
“The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night,” murmured the young
student, “and my love will be of the company. If I bring her a red rose
she will dance with me till dawn. If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold
her in my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her
hand will be clasped in mine. But there is no red rose in my garden, so
I shall sit lonely, and she will pass me by. She will have no heed of me,
and my heart will break.”
“Here, indeed, is the true lover,” said the Nightingale. “What I
sing of, he suffers: what is joy to me, to him is pain. Surely love is a
wonderful thing. It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine
opals. Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the
market-place. It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be
weighed out in the balance for gold.”
“The musicians will sit in their gallery,” said the young Student,
“and play upon their stringed instruments, and my love will dance to
the sound of the harp and the violin. She will dance so lightly that her
feet will not touch the floor, and the courtiers in their gay dresses will
throng round her. But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose
to give her;” and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his
face in his hands, and wept.
“Why is he weeping?” asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him
with his tail in the air.
“Why, indeed?” said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a
sunbeam.
“Why, indeed?” whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low
voice.
“He is weeping for a red rose,” said the Nightingale.
“For a red rose?” they cried; “how very ridiculous!” and the little
Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.
But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student’s sorrow,
and she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of
Love.
Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the
air. She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she
sailed across the garden.
In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and
when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest
song.”
But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are white,” it answered; “as white as the foam of the sea,
and whiter than the snow upon the mountain. But go to my brother who
grows round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you
want.”
So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing
round the old sun-dial.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest
song.”
But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are yellow,” it answered; “as yellow as the hair of the
mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the
daffodil that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his
scythe. But go to my brother who grows beneath the Student’s window,
and perhaps he will give you what you want.”
So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing
beneath the Student’s window.
“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest
song.”
But the Tree shook its head.
“My roses are red,” it answered, “as red as the feet of the dove, and
redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the ocean-
cavern. But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has nipped
my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no
roses at all this year.”
“One red rose is all I want,” cried the Nightingale, “only one red
rose! Is there no way by which I can get it?”
“There is a way,” answered the Tree; “but it is so terrible that I dare
not tell it to you.”
“Tell it to me,” said the Nightingale, “I am not afraid.”
“If you want a red rose,” said the Tree, “you must build it out of music
by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart’s-blood. You must sing
to me with your breast against a thorn. All night long you must sing to
me, and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow
into my veins, and become mine.”
“Death is a great price to pay for a red rose,” cried the Nightingale,
“and Life is very dear to all. It is pleasant to sit in the green wood, and
to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot of
pearl. Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the bluebells
that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the hill. Yet Love
is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird compared to the heart
of a man?”
So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed
through the grove.
The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left
him, and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.
“Be happy,” cried the Nightingale, “be happy; you shall have your
red rose. I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with
my own heart’s-blood. All that I ask of you in return is that you will
be a true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise,
and mightier than Power, though he is mighty. Flame-coloured are his
wings, and coloured like flame is his body. His lips are sweet as honey,
and his breath is like frankincense.”
The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not
understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew
the things that are written down in books.
But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of
the little Nightingale, who had built her nest in his branches.
“Sing me one last song,” he whispered; “I shall feel very lonely
when you are gone.”
So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water
bubbling from a silver jar.
When she had finished her song, the Student got up, and pulled a
note-book and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.
“She has form,” he said to himself, as he walked away through the
grove – “that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling? I am
afraid not. In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style without any
sincerity. She would not sacrifice herself for others. She thinks merely
of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish. Still, it must
be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice. What a pity
it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good!” And he
went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and began to
think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.
And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to
the Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn. All night long she
sang with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned
down and listened. All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper
and deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.
She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl. And
on the topmost spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous
rose, petal following petal, as song followed song. Pale was it, at first,
as the mist that hangs over the river - pale as the feet of the morning,
and silver as the wings of the dawn. As the shadow of a rose in a mirror
of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the rose that
blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.
But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come
before the rose is finished.”
So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder
and louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul
of a man and a maid.
And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like
the flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the
bride. But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose’s heart
remained white, for only a Nightingale’s heart’s-blood can crimson the
heart of a rose.
And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the
thorn. “Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will
come before the rose is finished.”
So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn
touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her. Bitter,
bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang
of the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the
tomb.
And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern
sky. Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the
heart.
But the Nightingale’s voice grew fainter, and her little wings began
to beat, and a film came over her eyes. Fainter and fainter grew her
song, and she felt something choking her in her throat.
Then she gave one last burst of music. The white Moon heard it, and
she forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky. The red rose heard it,
and it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold
morning air. Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke the
sleeping shepherds from their dreams. It floated through the reeds of
the river, and they carried its message to the sea.
“Look, look!” cried the Tree, “the rose is finished now;” but the
Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass,
with the thorn in her heart.
And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.
“Why, what a wonderful piece of luck! he cried; ‘here is a red rose!
I have never seen any rose like it in all my life. It is so beautiful that I
am sure it has a long Latin name;” and he leaned down and plucked it.
Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor’s house with the rose
in his hand.
The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding
blue silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.
“You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose,”
cried the Student. Here is the reddest rose in all the world. You will
wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell
you how I love you.”
But the girl frowned.
“I am afraid it will not go with my dress,” she answered; ‘and,
besides, the Chamberlain’s nephew has sent me some real jewels, and
everybody knows that jewels cost far more than flowers.”
“Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful,” said the Student
angrily; and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter,
and a cart-wheel went over it.
“Ungrateful!” said the girl. “I tell you what, you are very rude; and,
after all, who are you? Only a Student. Why, I don’t believe you have
even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain’s nephew
has;” and she got up from her chair and went into the house.
“What a silly thing Love is,” said the Student as he walked away. ‘It
is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is
always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making
one believe things that are not true. In fact, it is quite unpractical, and,
as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to Philosophy
and study Metaphysics.”
So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and
began to read.
An extract from ‘Colin Cowdrey Lecture’
– ‘The Lahore Attack’
Kumar Sangakkara
I was fortunate that during my life I never experienced violence
in Sri Lanka first hand. They have been so many bomb explosions over
the years but I was never in the wrong place at the wrong time.
In Colombo, apart from these occasional bombs, life was
relatively normal. People had the luxury of being physically detached
from the war. Children went to school, people went to work, I played
my cricket.
In other parts of the country, though, people were putting their
lives in harm’s way every day either in the defence of their motherland
or just trying to survive the geographical circumstances that made them
inhabit a war zone.
For them, avoiding bullets, shells, mines and grenades, was
imperative for survival. This was an experience that I could not relate
to. I had great sympathy and compassion for them, but had no real
experience with which I could draw parallels.
That was until we toured Pakistan in 2009. We set-off to play
two Tests in Karachi and Lahore. The first Test played on a featherbed,
past without great incident.
The second Test was also meandering along with us piling up a
big first innings when we departed for the ground on day three. Having
been asked to leave early instead of waiting for the Pakistan bus, we
were anticipatiing a day of hard toil for the bowlers.
At the back of the bus the fast bowlers were loud in their
complaints. I remember Thilan Thushara being particularly vocal,
complaining that his back was near breaking point. He joked that he
wished a bomb would go off so we could all leave Lahore and go back
home.
Not thirty seconds had passed when we heard what sounded
like fire crackers going off. Suddenly a shout came from the front: “Get
down they are shooting at the bus.”
The reaction was immediate. Everyone dived for cover and
took shelter on the aisle or behind the seats. With very little space, we
were all lying on top of each other.
Then the bullets started to hit. It was like rain on a tin roof. The
bus was at a standstill, an easy target for the gunmen.
As bullets started bursting through the bus all we could do was
stay still and quiet, hoping and praying to avoid death or injury.
Suddenly Mahela, who sits at the back of the bus, shouts saying
he thinks he has been hit in the shin. I am lying next to Tilan. He groans
in pain as a bullet hits him in the back of his thigh.
As I turn my head to look at him I feel something whizz past my
ear and a bullet thuds into the side of the seat, the exact spot where my
head had been a few seconds earlier.
I feel something hit my shoulder and it goes numb. I know I had
been hit, but I was just relieved and praying I was not going to be hit in
the head.
Tharanga Paranavithana, on his debut tour, is also next to me.
He stands up, bullets flying all around him, shouting “I have been hit” as
he holds his blood-soaked chest. He collapsed onto his seat, apparently
unconscious.
I see him and I think: “Oh my God, you were out first ball, run
out the next innings and now you have been shot. What a terrible first
tour.”
It is strange how clear your thinking is. I did not see my life
flash by. There was no insane panic. There was absolute clarity and
awareness of what was happening at that moment.
I hear the bus roar into life and start to move. Dilshan is
screaming at the driver: “Drive...Drive.” We speed up swerve and are
finally inside the safety of the stadium.
There is a rush to get off the bus. Tharanga Paranawithana stands
up. He is still bleeding and has a bullet lodged lightly in his sternum,
the body of the bus tempering its velocity enough to be stopped by the
bone.
Tilan is helped off the bus. In the dressing room there is a
mixture of emotions: anger, relief, joy. Players and coaching staff are
being examined by paramedics. Tilan and Paranavithana are taken by
ambulance to the hospital.
We all sit in the dressing room and talk. Talked about what
happened. Within minutes there is laughter and the jokes have started
to flow. We have for the first time been a target of violence. We had
survied.
We all realized that what some of our fellow Sri Lankans experienced
every day for nearly 30 years. There was a new respect and awe for
their courage and selflessness.
It is notable how quickly we got over that attack on us. Although
we were physically injured, mentally we held strong.
A few hours after the attack we were airlifted to the Lahore Air
Force Base.
Ajantha Mendis, his head swathed in bandages after multiple
shrapnel wounds, suggests a game of Poker. Tilan has been brought
back, sedated but fully conscious, to be with us and we make jokes at
him and he smiles back.
We were shot at, grenades were thrown at us, we were injured
and yet we were not cowed.
We were not down and out. “We are Sri Lankan,” we thought to
ourselves, “and we are tough and we will get through hardship and we
will overcome because our spirit is strong.”
This is what the world saw in our interviews immediately after
the attack: we were calm, collected, and rational. Our emotions held
true to our role as unofficial ambassadors.
A week after our arrival in Colombo from Pakistan I was
driving about town and was stopped at a checkpoint. A soldier politely
inquired as to my health after the attack. I said I was fine and added that
what they as soldiers experience every day we only experienced for a
few minutes, but managed to grab all the news headlines. That soldier
looked me in the eye and replied. “It is OK if I die because it is my job
and I am ready for it. But you are a hero and if you were to die it would
be a great loss for our country.”
I was taken aback. How can this man value his life less than
mine? His sincerity was overwhelming. I felt humbled.
This is the passion that cricket and cricketers evoke in Sri
Lankans. This is the love that I strive every-day of my career to be
worthy of.
The Lumber Room - Saki
THE CHILDREN WERE to be driven, as a special treat, to the
sands at Jagborough. Nicholas was not to be of the party; he was in
disgrace. Only that morning he had refused to eat his wholesome bread-
and-milk on the seemingly frivolous ground that there was a frog in it.
Older and wiser and better people had told him that there could
not possibly be a frog in his bread-and-milk and that he was not to talk
nonsense; he continued, nevertheless, to talk what seemed the veriest
nonsense, and described with much detail the colouration and markings
of the alleged frog. The dramatic part of the incident was that there
really was a frog in Nicholas’s basin of bread-and-milk; he had put it
there himself, so he felt entitled to know something about it. The sin of
taking a frog from the garden and putting it into a bowl of wholesome
bread-and-milk was enlarged on at great length, but the fact that stood
out clearest in the whole affair, as it presented itself to the mind of
Nicholas, was that the older, wiser, and better people had been proved
to be profoundly in error in matters about which they had expressed the
utmost assurance.
‘You said there couldn’t possibly be a frog in my bread-and-
milk; there was a frog in my bread-and-milk,’ he repeated, with the
insistence of a skilled tactician who does not intend to shift from
favourable ground.
So his boy-cousin and girl-cousin and his quite uninteresting
younger brother were to be taken to Jagborough sands that afternoon
and he was to stay at home. His cousins’ aunt, who insisted, by an
unwarranted stretch of imagination, in styling herself his aunt also,
had hastily invented the Jagborough expedition in order to impress
on Nicholas the delights that he had justly forfeited by his disgraceful
conduct at the breakfast-table. It was her habit, whenever one of the
children fell from grace, to improvise something of a festival nature
from which the offender would be rigorously debarred; if all the
children sinned collectively they were suddenly informed of a circus
in a neighbouring town, a circus of unrivalled merit and uncounted
elephants, to which, but for their depravity, they would have been taken
that very day.
A few decent tears were looked for on the part of Nicholas when
the moment for the departure of the expedition arrived. As a matter of
fact, however, all the crying was done by his girl-cousin, who scraped
her knee rather painfully against the step of the carriage as she was
scrambling in.
‘How she did howl,’ said Nicholas cheerfully, as the party
drove off without any of the elation of high spirits that should have
characterised it.
‘She’ll soon get over that,’ said the soi-disant aunt; ‘it will be
a glorious afternoon for racing about over those beautiful sands. How
they will enjoy themselves!’
‘Bobby won’t enjoy himself much, and he won’t race much
either,’ said Nicholas with a grim chuckle; ‘his boots are hurting him.
They’re too tight.’
‘Why didn’t he tell me they were hurting?’ asked the aunt with
some asperity.
‘He told you twice, but you weren’t listening. You often don’t
listen when we tell you important things.’
‘You are not to go into the gooseberry garden,’ said the aunt,
changing the subject.
‘Why not?’ demanded Nicholas.
‘Because you are in disgrace,’ said the aunt loftily.
Nicholas did not admit the flawlessness of the reasoning; he
felt perfectly capable of being in disgrace and in a gooseberry garden
at the same moment. His face took on an expression of considerable
obstinacy. It was clear to his aunt that he was determined to get into the
gooseberry garden, ‘only,’ as she remarked to herself, ‘because I have
told him he is not to.’
Now the gooseberry garden had two doors by which it might
be entered, and once a small person like Nicholas could slip in there
he could effectually disappear from view amid the masking growth
of artichokes, raspberry canes, and fruit bushes. The aunt had many
other things to do that aftemoon, but she spent an hour or two in trivial
gardening operations among flower beds and shrubberies, whence she
could keep a watchful eye on the two doors that led to the forbidden
paradise. She was a woman of few ideas, with immense powers of con-
centration.
Nicholas made one or two sorties into the front garden,
wriggling his way with obvious stealth of purpose towards one or other
of the doors, but never able for a moment to evade the aunt’s watchful
eye. As a matter of fact, he had no intention of trying to get into the
gooseberry garden, but it was extremely convenient for him that his
aunt should believe that he had; it was a belief that would keep her on
self-imposed sentry-duty for the greater part of the aftemoon. Having
thoroughly confirmed and fortified her suspicions, Nicholas slipped
back into the house and rapidly put into execution a plan of action that
had long germinated in his brain. By standing on a chair in the library
one could reach a shelf on which reposed a fat, important-looking key.
The key was as important as it looked; it was the instrument which kept
the mysteries of the lumber-room secure from unauthorized intrusion,
which opened a way only for aunts and such-like privileged persons.
Nicholas had not much experience of the art of fitting keys into keyholes
and turning locks, but for some days past he had practised with the key
of the school-room door; he did not believe in trusting too much to luck
and accident. The key turned stiffly in the lock, but it turned. The door
opened, and Nicholas was in an unknown land, compared with which
the gooseberry garden was a stale delight, a mere material pleasure.
Often and often Nicholas had pictured to himself what the
lumber-room might be like, that region that was so carefully sealed
from youthful eyes and concerning which no questions were ever
answered. It came up to his expectations. In the first place it was large
and dimly lit, one high window opening on to the forbidden garden
being its only source of illumination. In the second place it was a
storehouse of unimagined treasures. The aunt-by-assertion was one of
those people who think that things spoil by use and consign them to
dust and damp by way of preserving them. Such parts of the house as
Nicholas knew best were rather bare and cheerless, but here there were
wonderful things for the eye to feast on. First and foremost there was
a piece of framed tapestry that was evidently meant to be a fire-screen.
To Nicholas it was a living, breathing story; he sat down on a roll of
Indian hangings, glowing in wonderful colours beneath a layer of dust,
and took in all the details of the tapestry picture. A man, dressed in the
hunting costume of some remote period, had just transfixed a stag with
an arrow; it could not have been a difficult shot because the stag was
only one or two paces away from him; in the thickly growing vegetation
that the picture suggested it would not have been difficult to creep up to
a feeding stag, and the two spotted dogs that were springing forward to
join in the chase had evidently been trained to keep to heel till the arrow
was discharged. That part of the picture was simple, if interesting, but
did the huntsman see, what Nicholas saw, that four galloping wolves
were coming in his direction through the wood? There might be more
than four of them hidden behind the trees, and in any case would the
man and his dogs be able to cope with the four wolves if they made an
attack? The man had only two arrows left in his quiver, and he might
miss with one or both of them; all one knew about his skill in shooting
was that he could hit a large stag at a ridiculously short range. Nicholas
sat for many golden minutes revolving the possibilities of the scene; he
was inclined to think that there were more than four wolves and that the
man and his dogs were in a tight corner.
But there were other objects of delight and interest claiming
his instant attention: here were quaint twisted candlesticks in the shape
of snakes, and a teapot fashioned like a china-duck, out of whose
open beak the tea was supposed to come. How dull and shapeless the
nursery teapot seemed in comparison! And there was a carved sandal-
wood box packed tight with aromatic cotton-wool, and between the
layers of cotton-wool were little brass figures, hump-necked bulls, and
peacocks and goblins, delightful to see and to handle. Less promising in
appearance was a large square book with plain black covers; Nicholas
peeped into it, and, behold, it was full of coloured pictures of birds.
And such birds! In the garden, and in the lanes when he went for a
walk, Nicholas came accross a few birds, of which the largest were
an occasional magpie or woodpigeon; here were herons and bustards,
kites, toucans, tiger-bitterns, brush turkeys, ibises, golden pheasants,
a whole portrait gallery of undreamed-of creatures. And as he was
admiring the colouring of the mandarin duck and assigning a life-
history to it, the voice of his aunt in shrill vociferation of his name came
from the gooseberry garden without. She had grown suspicious at his
long disappearance, and had leapt to the conclusion that he had climbed
over the wall behind the sheltering screen of the lilac bushes; she was
now engaged in energetic and rather hopeless search for him among the
artichokes and raspberry canes.
‘Nicholas, Nicholas!’ she screamed, ‘you are to come out of this
at once. It’s no use trying to hide there; I can see you all the time.’ It was
probably the first time for twenty years that any one had smiled in that
lumber-room.
Presently the angry repetitions of Nicholas’s name gave way
to a shriek, and a cry for somebody to come quickly. Nicholas shut the
book, restored it carefully to its place in a corner, and shook some dust
from a neighbouring pile of newspapers over it. Then he crept from
the room, locked the door, and replaced the key exactly where he had
found it. His aunt was still calling his name when he sauntered into the
front garden.
‘Who’s calling?’ he asked.
‘Me,’ came the answer from the other side of the wall, ‘didn’t
you hear me? I’ve been looking for you in the gooseberry garden, and
I’ve slipped into the rain-water tank. Luckily there’s no water in it, but
the sides are slippery and I can’t get out. Fetch the little ladder from
under the cherry tree-’
‘I was told I wasn’t to go into the gooseberry garden,’ said
Nicholas promptly.
‘I told you not to, and now I tell you that you may,’ came the
voice from the rain-water tank, rather impatiently.
‘Your voice doesn’t sound like aunt’s,’ objected Nicholas; ‘you
may be the Evil One tempting me to be disobedient. Aunt often tells me
that the Evil One tempts me and that I always yield. This time I’m not
going to yield.’
‘Don’t talk nonsense,’ said the prisoner in the tank; ‘go and
fetch the ladder.’
‘Will there be strawberry jam for tea?’ asked Nicholas
innocently.
‘Certainly there will be,’ said the aunt, privately resolving that
Nicholas should have none of it.
‘Now I know that you are the Evil One and not aunt,’ shouted
Nicholas gleefully; ‘when we asked aunt for strawberry jam yesterday
she said there wasn’t any. I know there are four jars of it in the store
cupboard, because I looked, and of course you know it’s there, but she
doesn’t, because she said there wasn’t any. Oh, Devil, you have sold
yourself!’
There was an unusual sense of luxury in being able to talk to an
aunt as though one was talking to the Evil One, but Nicholas knew, with
childish discernment that such luxuries were not to be over-indulged in.
He walked noisily away, and it was a kitchenmaid, in search of parsley,
who eventually rescued the aunt from the rain-water tank.
Tea that evening was partaken of in a fearsome silence. The tide
had been at its highest when the children had arrived at Jagborough
Cove, so there had been no sands to play on-a circumstance that the
aunt had overlooked in the haste of organizing her punitive expedition.
The tightness of Bobby’s boots had had disastrous effect on his temper
the whole of the afternoon, and altogether the children could not have
been said to have enjoyed themselves. The aunt maintained the frozen
muteness of one who has suffered undignified and unmerited detention
in a rain-water tank for thirty-five minutes. As for Nicholas, he, too,
was silent, in the absorption of one who has much to think about; it was
just possible, he considered, that the huntsman would escape with his
hounds while the wolves feasted on the stricken stag.
An extract from “Wave” – A Memoir of Life after the Tsunami
Sonali Deraniyagala
It was then she saw the wave. “Oh my God, the sea’s coming
in.” That’s what she said. I looked behind me. It didn’t seem that
remarkable. Or alarming. It was only the white curl of a big wave.
But you couldn’t usually see breaking waves from our room.
You hardly noticed the ocean at all. It was just a glint of blue above
that wide spread of sand that sloped sharply down to the water. Now
the froth of a wave had scaled up this slope and was nearing the tall
conifers that were halfway between our room and the water’s edge,
incongruous those trees in this lanscape of brittle thorny scrub. This
was peculiar. I called out to Steve in the bathroom. “Come out, Steve,
I want to show you something odd.” I didn’t want him to miss this.
I wanted him to come out quick before all this foam dissoved. “In a
minute,” Steve muttered, with no intention of rushing out.
Then there was more white froth. And more. Vik was sitting by
the back door reading the first page of The Hobbit. I told him to shut
that door. It was a glass door with four panels, and he closed each one,
then came across the room and stood by me. He didn’t say anything, he
didn’t ask me what was going on.
The foam turned into waves. Waves leaping over the ridge
where the beach ended. This was not normal. The sea never came this
far in. Waves not receding or dissolving. Closer now. Brown and gray.
Brown or gray. Waves rushing past the conifers and coming closer to
our room. All these waves now, charging, churning. Suddenly furious.
Suddenly menacing. “Steve, you’ve got to come out. Now.” Steve ran
out of the bathroom, tying his sarong. He looked outside. We didn’t
speak.
I grabbed Vik and Malli, and we all ran out the front door. I was
ahead of Steve. I held the boys each by the hand. “Give me one of them.
Give me one of them,” Steve shouted, reaching out. But I didn’t. That
would have slowed us down. We had no time. We had to be fast. I knew
that. But I didn’t know what I was fleeng from.
I didn’t stop for my parents. I didn’t stop to knock on the door
of my parents’ room, which was next to ours, on the right as we ran out.
I didn’t shout to warn them. I didn’t bang on their door and call them
out. As I ran past, for a splintered second, I wondered if I should. But
I couldn’t stop. It will stall us. We must keep running. I held the boys
tight by their hands. We have to get out.
We fled towards the driveway at the front of the hotel. The boys
ran as fast as I did. They didn’t stumble or fall. They were barefoot,
but they didn’t slow down because stones or thorns were hurting them.
They didn’t say a word. Our feet were loud, though. I could hear them,
slamming the ground.
Ahead of us a jeep was moving, fast. Now it stopped. A safari
jeep with open back and sides and a brown canvas hood. This jeep was
waiting for us. We ran up to it. I flung Vikram into the back, and he
landed facedown on the green corrugated-metal floor. Steve jumped in
and picked him up. We were all inside now. Steve had Vik on his lap, I
sat across from them with Mail on mine. A man was driving the jeep. I
didn’t know who he was.
Now I looked around me and nothing was unusual. No frothing
waters here, only the hotel. It was all as it should be. The long rows of
rooms with clay-tiled roofs, the terra-cotta floors of the open corridors,
the dusty, orange-brown gravel driveway thick with wild cactus on both
sides. All there. The waves must have receded, I thought.
I hadn’t seen Orlantha run with us, but she must have done. She
was in the jeep. Her parents had rushed out of their rooms as we came
out of ours, and now her father, Anton, was with us too. Orlantha’s
mother, Beulah, was hoisting hereself into the jeep and the driver
revved the engine. The jeep jerked forward and she lost her grip, fell
off. The driver didn’t see this. I told him to stop, I kept yelling to him
that she had fallen out. But he kept going. Beulah lay on the driveway
and looked up at us as we pulled away. She half- smiled, in confusion
it seemed.
Anton leaned out the back to reach Beulah and drag her up.
When he couldn’t, he jumped out. They were both lying on the gravel
now, but I didn’t call out to the driver to wait for them. He was driving
very fast. He’s right, I thought, we have to keep moving. Soon we will
be away from the hotel.
We were leaving my parents behind. I panicked now. If I had
screamed at their door as we ran out, they could have run with us. “We
didn’t get Aachchi and seeya,” I yelled to Steve. This made Vikram cry.
Steve held on to him, clasping him to his chest. “Aachchi and seeya
will be okay, they will come later, they will come,” Steve said. Vik
stopped crying and snuggled into Steve.
I was thankful for Steve’s words, I was reassured. Steve is right.
There are no waves now. Ma and Da, they will walk out of their room.
We will get out of here first, and they’ll join us. I had an image of my
father walking out of the hotel, there were puddles everywhere, he had
his trousers rolled up. I’ll ring Ma on her mobile as soon as I get to a
phone, I thought.
We were nearing the end of the hotel driveway. We were about
to turn left onto the dirt track that runs by the lagoon. Steve stared at
the road ahead of us. He kept banging his heel on the floor of the jeep.
Hurry up, get a move on.
The jeep was in water then. Suddenly, all this water inside the
jeep. Water sloshing over our knees. Where did this water come from?
I didn’t see those waves get to us. This water must have burst out from
beneath the ground. What is happening? The jeep moved forward
slowly. I could hear its engine straining, snarling. We can drive through
this water, I thought.
We were tilting from side. The water rising now, filling the jeep.
It came up to our chests. Steve and I lifted the boys as high as we could.
Steve held Vik, I had Mal. Their faces above the water, the tops of their
heads pressing against the jeep’s canvas hood, our hands tight under
their armpits. The jeep rocked. It was floating, the wheels no longer
gripping the ground. We kept steadying ourselves on the seats. No one
spoke. No one uttered a sound.
Then I saw Steve’s face. I’d never seen him like that before. A
sudden look of terror, eyes wide open, mouth agape. He saw something
behind me that I couldn’t see. I didn’t have time to turn around and
look.
Because it turned over. The jeep turned over. On my side.
Pain. That was all I could feel. Where am I? Something was
crushing my chest. I am trapped under the jeep, I thought, I am being
flattened by it. I tried to push it away, I wanted to wriggle out.But it was
too heavy, whatever was on me, the pain unrelenting in my chest.
I wasn’t stuck under anything. I was moving, I could tell now.
My body was curled up, I was spinning fast.
Am I underwater? It didn’t feel like water, but it has to be, I
thought. I was being dragged along, and my body was whipping
backwards and forwards. I couldn’t stop myself. When at times my
eyes opened, I couldn’t see water. Smoky and gray.
Drama
Twilight of a Crane – Yu Zuwa Junji Kinoshita
CHARACTERS
Tsu..................... The name reads Tsu-u.
Yohyo............... The name reads Yohyo-o.
Sodo.................. The name reads So-o-do.
Unzu.................. The name reads Un-zu.
Children.
(A tumble-down hut in a field covered with snow. The setting sun is
illuminating the western sky.
A children’s song is heard from a distance:
“Jiyan Ni Kiseru Futo Nuuno
Bayan Ni Kiseru Futo Nuuno
Chin Kara Kan Kara
Ton Ton Ton....................”
The meaning of this song is:
“Let’s sew a cushion for grandpa!
Let’s sew a cushion for grandma!
Chin Kara Kan Kara
Ton Ton Ton.................”
(In the interior of the hut Yohyo is seen taking a nap by the fire-side.
The song stops. The children appear running in.)
Children:
(in unison, as if singing) Tsu- yan, Tsu- yan, let us sing!
Tsu-yan, Tsu-yan let us play ! Tsu-yan, Tsu-yan, let us
sing !
Yohyo:
(awaken) Hello! What are you doing here?
Children:
Tsu-yan, let us play! Let us sing!
Yohyo:
Looking for Tsu? No, she isn’t here. She went out.
Children:
She’s gone, really? What ever shall we do? Where’d
she go?
Yohyo:
How do I know!
Children:
Come on, Yohyo. Tell us where she went. When’s she
coming back? Soon? Yohyo, please.............
Yohyo:
Be quiet! You’re making too much noise! (He stands
up to his feet.)
Children:
(scattering) Yohyo is getting angry! Ha ha ! You’re a
bit teched! cross.
Yohyo:
(Laughing) Ha, ha, ha! stay here I’ll play with you.
Children:
Really? What’ll we play?
Yohyo:
What’ll we play?
Children:
‘’Nen-gara’’?
Yohyo:
All right, “Nen – gara’’
Children:
Singing ?
Yohyo:
All right, singing.
Children:
Snow-ball fights?
Yohyo:
Fine, snow-ball fights.
Children:
‘’Kagome – Kagome ?’’
Yohyo:
Yes, “ Kagome- Kagome,’’
Children:
Run sheep run?
Yohyo:
Children:
Yohyo:
All right, run sheep run. Let’s go! I’ll tag you. Are you
ready?
Yes, Run sheep run, run sheep run...............( Repeating
these words, they run away. Yohyo is also about to
follow them, but stops.)
Oh dear, I almost forgot! Cold soup is no good for my
sweet heart ! (He puts a kettle on the fire as Tsu
appears from inner room.)
My darling............................
Yohyo:
Hello, my dear, where’ve you been?
Oh, nowhere specially, but..................you, my dear,
don’t........................
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
(giggling) Nothing! Just going to warm up some soup
for you. It’s no good unless it’s hot!
Thank you, my dear, Now I’ll make supper for you.
Thank you very much. I’ll be back soon. Now we are
going to play “Nen-gara.”
Really?
Yohyo:
And snow-ball fights..............and then singing.
Yohyo:
And “Kagome-Kagome”.............................then, Run
sheep run..........Isn’t that the name?
That’s right- Run sheep run. Tsu, why don’t you come
I wish I could. But I have to prepare supper!
Yohyo:
Forget the supper. Tsu, let’s go (He pulls at her hand.)
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
No, no I can’t.
Stop worrying about the supper. You have got to come.
Let’s play together!
No, I can’t, Yohyo. I have got to ......................( With a
smile, she is pulled off by Yohyo)
( Pause, A children’s song is heard from a distance.
Sodo and Unzu appear)
Is that (........................) Is that Yohyo’s wife?
Yes, (indeed) Yohyo is the luckiest man in the world
to get such a nice wife. Since she came here, he never
does anything but, sleep by the fire-side all day long.
How I envy him!
How in the world could a stupid man like him get such
a pretty wife?
I wish, I knew! From somewhere and unnoticed she
appeared like a wind. Since then, that lazy fellow has
been coining money without lifting a finger over.
Unzu! Are you positive about that story of the precious
cloth?
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Of course, I am. It’s true. My goodness, we could sell
that cloth at 10 dollars yard in the town!
Really? Did you say that that wife of his weaves the
stuff?
That’s right – but there’s queer thing – she won’t let
any one see her in the weaving-room ! Yohyo told me,
every time she goes to the weaving room, she says:
“Don’t look into the room.’’ And Yohyo is so foolishly
honest that he never tries to peep. He goes to bed right
away,and when he wakes up in the morning, there is
the cloth all finished. It’s a really wonderful cloth.
You called it “Senba- Ori” didn’t you?
Yes that’s what the town-folk call it! They say cloth
of that sort cannot be seen unless they go to the “Ten
jiku” (Heaven). It’s as valuable as that.
Sodo:
Unzu, you must be making a pretty good profit in your
deals with that cloth.
Unzu:
Well- I ..........Not too big but not so small either.
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Curse you, you wretched thief.............But, Unzu, if it
is really a “Senba- Ori” it must be worth a lot more
than a hundred dollars.
Is it ?............. Then Sodo, tell me what on earth is the
“Senba- Ori”
Well, it’s the fanciest cloth you ever did see! made of a
thousand feathers plucked from a live hen crane ............
I can’t believe it? Well then, Where on earth
does she get such feathers?
Humph- is this the weaving- room? (in spite of him
self he goes up into house and looks into the
adjoining room.) Yes, it’s true- there’s a loom.........Oh,
heavens!............. (With suprise and curiosity he goes
into the weaving-room)
Sodo, what’s the matter with you?
(coming out of the weaving- room with two or three
Unzu:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
pieces of feather in his hand ) look! Unzu! This is a
crane’s feather !! Now I know you’re right.
You see? I never lie.
(Pause. Tsu, Who has been back unnoticed, comes out
of the inner room)
(Surprized) Oh, Heavens!
(Surprized, too) God bless me! I -I am sorry to have
broken in while you- you were out.............
Excuse me,Mrs – but I- I am U - Unzu from the village
over there. And- I –I am much- much obliged to Yohyo
about – about the cloth - and –
...................? (She stands in silence inclining her head
on one side like a bird)
Then, Mrs.- I’ve got an idea about the cloth which this
low - fellow here told me you’ve woven ......O, sorry!
I should have told you who I am. I’m Sodo from the
village over there ............. And I’d like to have a little
talk with you...... Well, now - I’m afraid I shouldn’t ask
you thing like this – but if you don’t mind, would you
tell me if it is a real “Senba Ori” ?
...................(She has been looking at them inquiringly
with a puzzeled look, but suddenly moves away quikly
into inner room as if she heard a sound.)
...............................?
...............................?
Unzu!
How come..? she didn’t seem to understand!
Yes, she didn’t realise what we were saying....... She
acted just like a bird.........
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
You’re right ! just like a bird !
( Dusk falls and fire in the hearth flickers.)
(Looking upon the feathers which he picked up before)
Didn’t you ever hear of the story of a bewitched crane
that married a man?
What’s that ! what did you say?
How I begin to get it ! Here’s the point ...............
Yesterday a villager told me that a couple of days
ago when he happened to pass by the lake in mountain
in the evening, he saw a young woman standing on the
beach....... And, can you imagine, while he was spying
on her, she went in to the water and became a crane!
Oh, Lord! is that the absolute truth?
And, after having swum a bit, she became a woman
again and disappeared!
Oh, my God! ( he runs out of the hut.)
You crazy hoot-owl! stop your shouting! (But he him
self rushes out of the hut unconsciously)
Then,is she.......is his wife the ghost of a crane?
Be quite, you shivering coward! only God knows!
What shall I do? (Groaning with hands over his head)
Oh, God help me! I’ve cheated Yohyo out of a lot of
profit!
Forget it, Unzu! if it’s a real “Senba Ori”- Gee we can
sell it at a thousand dollars in Kyoto!
A thousand dollars? Did you say a thousand dollars?
Yes surely. Besides that, you said that lately Yohyo has
been getting a bit sharper about money, didn’t you?
Unzu:
Yes, that’s right. It’s positively true.
Sodo:
Well then, if that’s so, the best idea is to get him on our
side and get his wife to weave a lot more of the cloth!
Unzu:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Yes........... I guess you’re right.
Look! Here he comes.
(coming back absent-mindedly, singing) Jiyan Ni
Kiseru Futo Nuuno, Bayan Ni Kiseru Futo
Nuuno,Chin Kara kan kan, Ton Ton Ton – why, I’ve
forgotten to boil rice for Tsu.
Hello, Yohyo !
Yes..............?
Don’t you know me?.......I’m Sodo from the village
there..........And ..........Uh, Unzu- you tell him.
Oh, Unzu, you’ve been here again talking shop,
haven’t you?
Yes, right. If you’d turn out that cloth, you could make
as much easy money as you want!
Sorry, there isn’t any more cloth!
Tsu told me that’s all there is!
Don’t be silly,Yohyo. You’d make a quick profit!
No, no.......... I love Tsu. She is my darling!
You do love her, don’t you? Well, then why not save
up money for her by selling the cloth?
Yes, that sounds all right............. But every time she
weaves the cloth, she loses weight.
What? She loses weight?........Just a minute, Yohyo!
When and how did she first come to you?
You mean Tsu? Yes I’ve forgot when it was – but some
night when I was going to bed, she’d dropped in and
said she wanted to become my wife. (He smiles.)
Sodo:
Is that a fact!.........Yes, I see. Now then, have you –
haven’t you ever done something to help a crane?
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Crane? You say a crane? Yes, I remember now! .........
One day when I was working in the field a crane came
down with an arrow stuck in its back. So I pulled the
arrow out of its back and saved its life.
Really?.............Humph...........Unzu, now I got it- don’t
you see?
...................(he is shuddering.)
Well, if it’s so, if that’s true, we can still make a lot of
money that’s the whole point of this deal anyhow..........
Yohyo, I want to have a little talk about the – that cloth
....... I we –Yohyo ! You tell him the story.
Yes,All right - that’s a - no, you see, Yohyo, if you take
the cloth to Kyoto, you can get- get a thousand ............
You stupid fellow!............ why, Yohyo - it’s possible for
you to get hundreds of dollars this time! Then, get your
wife to weave the fabrics- just once more!
What? Hundreds of dollars? Really! You say hundreds
of.........
Yes,hundreds of dollars. (To Unzu) Isn’t that right?
Yes, It’s right.You can make hundreds of dollars.
Really? Really hundreds of dollars.........?
Well, then, you might coax your wife again...............
(noting Tsu who has been looking at them from inside
of the house) Yohyo, come here! I’ll tell you privately
the whole story.
(Pulling Yohyo by the sleeve, they exit.)
(Tsu, coming out, looks after them. And expression of
embrrassment and trouble is written all over her face.
before long, the children come running in.)
Children:
(severally) Here’s Tsu! Let us play now. Why did you
run away? Let us sing. “Kagome” - Hide and seek –
singing- Ring around the rosy.............(They surround
Tsu.) Let us play, let us play!
Dear children, it’s already dark. I’ll see you tomorrow.
Chidren:
No, no, dear - let’s play, let’s sing!
(absent-mindedly) Singing..............?
Children:
Hide- and –seek?
Hide-and-seek?
Children:
Ring- around – the rosy.
Ring- around-the rosy?
Children:
“Kagome - Kagome”
“Kagome - Kagome”?
Children:
Yes, all right - we’ll play “Kagome-Kagome”!
(Forming a ring around Tsu, they move round singing)
“Kagome, Kagome,
Kago No Naka No Tori wa
Itsu Itsu Deyaru,
Yoake No Ban Ni,
Tsuru, Tsuru, Tsubetta! (They stop)
“Ushiro No Shomen Dahre?
Ushiro No Shomen Dahre?”
(The meaning of this song:
“ Here we go walking around a bird in the cage,
Walking round and round, round and round,
Until evening, until morning.
Now will you tell us who is behind you,
When the song stops’’)
Who’s standing behind you? Who’s standing behind
you?.......... Say, my dear, why don’t you put your
hands over your eyes? you crouch down, my dear Tsu!
(having stood in deep throught, awaken) Oh, I am
sorry. Yes .......... (She crouches down and covers her
with her hands.)
(The children continue to move round singing the same
song. The light quikly fades out, leaving Tsu alone in
its focus.)
(Slowly standing up) Yohyo, my dear- what’s
happened to you? You are gradually changing. I can’t
understand why.
But you are moving to the other world where I can
never live. You are casting your lot with those
malicious, terrible people who shot me with an arrow.
You are becoming the same as those whose language I
cannot understand. What’s happened to you, Yohyo,
my Love? What shall I do?
What on earth can I do?.......................
Yohyo, you’ve saved my life. You were once
so innocent and kind that you could take the
arrow out of my back solely through tender-
heartedness - and only out of sympathy for me. I was
deeply touched by it.
I was so glad to come to you........... And when I first
wove the cloth with my feathers, you were as pleased as
a child. Then, in spite of the pain, I wove them again and
again. But you- my dear, you exchanged it every time
for the thing called “money”. But it’s all right. I don’t
mind if you like the “money” so much...............But now
you have money enough.
I’d like to live with you in this small house peacefully
and quietly without being troubled by any one. My
darling, you shouldn’t be the same as they. You should
be a man of the world I belong to. I wished I might have
lived with you forever, setting up our world in the middle
of this field, playing with children and working on the
farm.............. But still, you are going to leave me.You
are going farther and farther from me.......... What shall I
do? Tell me, my dear, what can I do?...........
(The song has stopped unnoticed. The lights come
up on the stage, but the children have already gone
away.
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Tsu looks away casually, and runs back into
the house with fear. Sodo, Unzu and Yohyo come in.)
You see, Yohyo? If she says she can’t weave any more,
you’ve got to threaten to leave her.
(giggling) Anyhow, that’s a wonderful cloth Tsu has
woven for me, isn’t it?
Yes, certainly. It’s so wonderful that we can sell it for
three or four times more than before! You see, it’s worth
that much more. So tell your wife this.
Yes, it’s worth three or four times more than before – is
that right?
Yes, it’s worth hundreds of dollars.
Hundreds of dollars- are you sure?
Yes, I’m certain of it. Then, you have her weave it right
away. (To Unzu) Don’t you think so, Unzu?
Yes, indeed, get it woven tonight, right away.
All right,.......... but Tsu said she couldn’t weave any
more.
You poor idiot! If you get a lot of profit from it, your
wife’d be pleased, too.
Right! I bet your wife’d be pleased, too
Maybe..............
Then, too, we’ll take you to see Kyoto. Don’t you
think, Unzu, Kyoto is a splended city?
Yes, it’s a wonderfully gay city!
I can imagine how fine it is.
Can you? Good! You see, you can make a lot of
money, and on top of that you can see. Kyoto. Over
there we’ll take you to many interesting places as I told
you. Or- say, Yohyo, don’t you want to see Kyoto?
Yohyo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Why not! I could go!
You want money, too, don’t you?
Yes, I want it.
(noticing Tsu in the house) Yohyo! Go ahead! If she says
no, you tell her you’re leaving, do you see?
Yes....................
(pushing Yohyo toward the house) You’re a good
fellow, my friend. Best of luck! Unzu, we’d better hide
ourselves to see what happens.
(Sodo and Unzu go out. As soon as they disapear, Tsu
leaps to welcome Yohyo)
Oh, my darling, come here now. Dear me! You’ve
soaking wet! I’m afraid you’ll catch cold! Come here,
and warm yourself. Supper’s ready. Thanks to you, the
soup is boiling. Won’t you eat supper now?
Yohyo:
Yes. (He sits down by the fire-side)
My dear, do start, please.
Yohyo:
Yes. (He eats)
What’s the matter with you? Why are you so sad?....
You shouldn’t stay outside so late. It’s too cold.........
You’ll not go out anywhere, will you? You’ll not talk
with strangers anymore, will you?
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Please, promise me............. My dear, I’ll do anything
for you. I’ll do whatever you want........... Now you
have got the“money” you like............
Yes, I’ve got money. I’ve got a lot of money in that sack.
Yes, you have. Then, from now on, won’t you lead
our life quietly as before? Won’t you please enjoy a life
of peace and happiness with me, together and forever?
Yohyo:
Yes, I love you, my dear.
My darling, I love you with my whole heart. Then
you’ll always stay as you are now, will you?
Yohyo:
Yes, I love you deeply and dearly. (Pause)
Won’t you have some more?........Why? What’s
happened?.......... Why aren’t you eating, my dear?
Yohyo:
Yes.......... Aw nothing .......... But, darling...........
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Yes...........?
You are lucky to have seen Kyoto so many a times. I
really envy you.
Do you? But I saw it just from the sky- (With a start she
changes the topic) Why? Why don’t you eat some more?
Yes, ah..........(Hesitating and timidly)........... My dear,
listen..........
Yes.............?
Yohyo:
I say.............Oh, for Heaven’s sake, I can’t say it!.........
Why? What’s the matter?
Yohyo:
Well, dearest.........( Hesitating and giggling)....... I just
can’t say it!.......
Why? What’s the matter? Why can’t you say it?........
Then, shall I guess it?
Yohyo:
Well.......... You want buckwheat cakes again, don’t
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
No?..........Well, then......... You want to hear my song,
don’t you?
No, it’s not right......... of course, I like your song, but
not today.
That isn’t it either?............well, let me see............
Then, you want to hear from me about Kyoto, don’t
you?.........Yes, I think I am right!
Yohyo:
Yes, you’re almost right,but also half wrong? Ha,
ha, ha..........(He laughs.)
What do you mean - half right and half wrong ?.........
Please, please, tell me what it is.
Yohyo:
Darling, you won’t be angry?
Why should I get angry with you?........What is it?
Please, please tell me, my darling.
Yohyo:
Well............ You see, Honey, I- I want to go Kyoto.
Yohyo:
To make a lot of money. So.......I want another piece of
that cloth.
(in surprise and embarrassment) You want some more
of that cloth? But, my darling! For God’s sake.........
Yohyo:
(in hurry) No, no, I don’t need any more, dear.
Yohyo:
(as if talking to herself) I promised and you agreed that
I wouldn’t weave any more......... But you still want
more............
Yes, we agreed to that. I don’t want any more. I don’t
need any more ( As if a child scolded, he is trying to
keep back his tears.)
(Suddenly something occurs to her mind) Oh, now I
see! It’s they- it’s they who are pulling you away from
me.Yes - those two who came to see you this evening-
they are trying to convert you to their way of thinking.
Yohyo:
Now, Darling.........Don’t be angry...........Tsu...............
....................
Yohyo:
Tsuu.........my dear..........
Yohyo:
(absent-mindedly) Money.........Money..........Why do
they want it so much?
Well...........Because if we have money, we can buy
nice things we want.
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Buy? What’s “Buy”? What’s nice thing? What do you
want beside me? No, no please, don’t want anything
but me! I hate money, I hate “buying” too. Please love
me, love only me. Love me forever, and let us live
together always!
Yes, certainly, I like to live with you- I love you very
much.
My darling - please, my darling..........(she embraces
him)..............Please, live with me like this. Don’t go
away from me!
Why! Who on earth wants to leave you! My dear! My
dear Tsu!
In your arms...........I recall the days gone by..........
Nothing bothered me- I was perfectly at ease in the vast
sky, and......... My dream’s come again. I am glad, my
dear, I am happy- I am happy only if you are always
with me. Please, be with me forever.......please, don’t
leave me.......please ........(Pause. Suddenly, she thrusts
him away) Yohyo, you are still thinking of Kyoto.........
you are still thinking of “money”!
Yohyo:
Yes-but, Tsu......... I can’t help it.
Yohyo:
You are.........you are....... I see........(With a sudden
intensity) No, no, no, don’t go to Kyoto, please! You’ll
not return again! You won’t come back to me!
Don’t be a fool, dearest. I’ll be back. I know I’ll come
back. I’ll go to Kyoto just to make a lot of profit....... Oh,
that’s a good idea - we’ll go to Kyoto together! (pause)
Are you so terribly anxious to go to Kyoto?........Are
you so terribly anxious for money?
Yohyo:
Yes, you see, Tsu, no one can be indifferent to money.
Are you so eager to get money? Are you so eager to go
to Kyoto? You are not as fond of me as of money, are
you ? You are not as fond of me as of Kyoto, are you?
Yohyo:
Tsu.......I - I dislike you putting it that way!
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Dislike? Did you say “ dislike”?
Yes, I dislike you. I don’t like you. I’m not fond of
you- you are a cross woman!
Yohyo! How could you........?
Weave the stuff right away! I’ll go to Kyoto! I’ll make
big money!
Dear, me! please, for God’s sake! Why on earth do you
speak like that, my darling?
Yohyo:
Weave the cloth. If you say you can’t, I’ll leave you!
For the Good Lord’s sake! You said you’d leave me,
didn’t you? My dear..........Darling..........How........how
could you say such a thing?
Yohyo:
(He keeps silence stubbornly)
My dear, my dear, please........(Shruging his
shoulders)....... Are you in earnest? You say it in earnest?
Please ,my dear...........
Yohyo:
Yes, I’ll leave you- unless you weave the cloth.
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Oh,Heavens!
Weave the cloth! make the stuff! Right away! They say
they can sell it at three or four times more than before
–it’s worth hundreds of dollars!
(in tremendous astonishment and confusion) What?
What did you say now? “Weave the cloth! Make the
stuff!”-following that, what did you say?
It’s worth hundreds of dollars. I said they can sell it for
me at three or four times as much!
(She looks mat him inquiringly, inclining her head on
one side as if a bird does)
You see, Tsu?...........This time they can sell it for more
than three or four times what it brought before........
(crying) I cannot understand! I cannot understand what
you are saying! It’s just the same as those who came
here this evening. I could see your lips moving and
hear the sound of voices. But I couldn’t understand
what you were saying!.......Good gracious! You’ve also
begun to speak their language- the words which I can’t
understand- the words which belong to the other world
I can never join! Oh, Heavens! What shall I do? What
shall I do? what should I do, dear Lord?
Yohyo:
What’s the matter with you, Tsu?
“What’s the matter with you, Tsu,? ” you said that,
didn’t you ? “ What’s the matter with you, Tsu? ”
you said that, didn’t you?
Yohyo:
(Astonished, he keeps looking at her face)
Did you? Did you? You said so, didn’t you?........ Alas!
You are going farther and farther from me.........My
Heavens! What shall I do? What can I do ?............
Please, don’t –don’t entice my husband...... Please........
(she goes out of the house)......Please.........For Heavens
sake.......Where are you, dear villagers?...................I ask
you..........I plead with you.......For Mercy’s sake............
Please, Stop pulling my Yohyo away ......(she walks
up and down on the stage) Please, for the Good Lord’s
sake!.......... For Mercy’s sake............ I ask you- I plead
with you! ........ Are you hiding yourselves? ...........
Come out, you cowards! Please........... You’re silly-
you’re unfair! Please........... I loathe you! I hate
you!.........Come out, you-.......... I’m sorry I said I hate
you. No, no ...........Please, dear villagers, for God’s
sake........... For Mercy’s sake - I ask you- I plead with
you........... Please, for the Good Lord’s sake..............
(Her strength is gone little by little, and at last she
sinks down in the snow)
Yohyo:
(coming out timidly and with fear) Hey .............
What’s the matter with you, Tsu? My dear........... (He
embraces her.)
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
(coming to herself) Oh, my darling...........
It’s cold-in the snow.......... (He takes her to the fireside
in his arms.)
(They warm themselves for a while in silence.)
You want so much - so much to go to Kyoto?
Yes, that’s............ because..............
(Pause.)
They say Kyoto is awfully beautiful...........By this time
cherry-blossoms will be in full bloom, won’t they?
(Pause.)
The streets are crowded with celebrites riding on ox-
carriages, aren’t they?........... You used to tell me that
before.
(Pause)
Oh dear! I’ve become sleepy. (He lies down.)
(Pause. Tsu lays a blanket on him and keeps looking
down at his sleeping face.
Abruptly, she jumps to her feet and goes to a
corner of the room to take a sack. Opening the sack,
she pours gold coins into the palm of her hand. The
coins overflow to fall on the floor. She stares at the coins
motionlessly.
The light quickly fades out, leaving the figure of Tsu
and gold alone in its focus)
This is it.............. This is it - everything comes from this
stuff......... Money ............ Money............... I wove that
cloth only to show you its beauty........ I was so glad to see
you appreciate it joyfully...........for your pleasure - for
the sake of your joy - I have woven it at the sacrifice of
my weight.......... But, now, there is no other means left
to keep you in my arms than - weaving another piece
of that cloth and having you make money.................
Other wise, you’ll not stay with me any more, will
you?....... But............ Yes, that’s all right- if you are so
fond of money - saving up money, and - you are so
fond of money-saving up money, and-you are so anxious
anxious to go to Kyoto, and further if I can keep you
to go to Kyoto, and further if I can keep you in my arms
in my arms by doing so- I will weave one more piece
by doing so-I will weave one more piece of cloth for
of cloth for you...... Will you forgive me with it?- that’s
you...... Will you forgive me with it?-that’s the last one
the last one .......... Because, if I go beyond it, I’m
.......... Because, if I go beyond it, I’m afraid I may not
afraid I may not live any longer........... Pardon me, my
live any longer........... Pardon me, my darling.........But
darling.........But you may go to Kyoto to sell it- and,
you may go to Kyoto to sell it-and, please, come back
Please
please, come back with the money gained!
gained!Please come back to me!
with the money
come back to me! You must come back! Please, swear
You must come back! Please, swear to me to come
to me to come back, my darling! ............And thereafter,
back,my darling! ............And thereafter, we may live
we may live together forever, forever.......... please, my
together forever, forever.......... please, my love, promise
love, promise me! Swear to me!
me! Swear to me!
(The lights come up.)
(The lights come up.)
(Shaking up Yohyo) My dear...........My darling........
please...........
Yohyo:
(half-asleep) Yah-aw................blah,blah........
My dear- My Love.........I’ll weave another stuff for
you,is that all right?
Yohyo:
Yes, aw........What did you say?
Yohyo:
I say I’ll weave that cloth for you again.
What? You say you weave.........? Is it true? Is it true,
dearest?
Yes, it’s true. I will- only once more.
Yohyo:
My dear! You’re fooling me, aren’t you?
No. It’s true. I’ll weave it once more. Then you may go
to Kyoto with it.
Yohyo:
Really? May I take it to Kyoto? Can I? Are you sure?
Yohyo:
Yes. And-getting your precious money, you have to
come back right away, you see? ........... And then, after
that , you and I ..........
Really? You say you’ll weave the cloth again for me?
You say I can go to Kyoto?Oh, wonderful! How nice
it is!............. Yes, I know I’ll come back with a lot of
profit-certainly, I’ll earn a lot of money. Tsu, I’m happy.
............I’ll...........
Yohyo:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Yohyo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
(having looked at Yohyo in the seventh heaven of his
delight)..........Well, now, here is the promise as usual –
you mustn’t watch me at all, you see?
Yes, certainly. I’ll never peep at you..........Oh, thank
God! You’ll weave it for me!............
Please, Yohyo, never, never, never look at me. Please,
swear before the gods......... If you should watch
me, it’d be the end of our relationship, you see?
Yes, I see. I’ll never look through. Yes- I’ll go to Kyoto-
I’m going to sell it four, five times more than before!
Please, swear never to look.You see, Yohyo? Please
never break this pledge by any means..........(She enters
into the weaving-room)
(The sound of a loom begins to be heard. Sodo
rushes out of his hiding place followed by Unzu.)
Fine! Look, Unzu. She’s begun to weave.
Yes...............But,having watched her from over there,
I’ve begun to feel sorry for his wife.
Stop, you foolish bastard! We’re in the big business of
money-making; what the hell will the pity and sympathy
do! (Rushing up into the house,he tries to look through
the weaving-room.)
Holy Moses! You can’t look into the room! Hey! You
cannot...............
Sodo, He says you can’t look into that room.........
Quiet stupid fool! Unless we see the weaving itself, who
the hell can be sure whether it’s a real “Senba-Ori” of
the crane’s feathers!
Yohyo:
No, no, no- please! You cannot! Tsu will be angry
Sodo, please.....!
Unzu:
Sodo...........
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Let me go! Let me see! You stupid nit-wit! (At last he
peeps into the weaving-room, and surprised)
Oh, Heavens!
What’s the matter?
Look, Unzu! A crane- there’s a crane-a crane’s
weaving on the loom.
What? A crane?......... ( He also peeps into the room,
and surprised.) Oh, heavens! That’s not the wife but a
crane! The crane is pacing to and fro on the loom with
her feathers in mouth........How extraordinary!......
Unzu! Now we’ve got it! All right!
Yes..........
I say, what’s happened? What’s the matter?
Nothing! There’s no one in the room but your beloved
one...... Say, Unzu, now we can got that stuff tomorrow
morning- well, let’s go and wait at home.
Aw, Yes......
I say, what did you say?......What’s there- in that
room?......Isn’t Tsu in there?
(being marched off by Sodo)Yes, there’s a crane! A real
crane is weaving on the loom! (Pulled by Sodo, he exits.)
What? A crane? - in this room?....I want to see- I could
see!.......But - no, no, no, I can’t. Tsu’ll get angry ......
But- I wonder what’s the crane doing? What’s it doing?
.......I want to see .......can’t I see, Tsu? ..... Tsu! can’t I
see? ....... Yes, I want to see.......I’ll take a quick look?- Is
that all right? ..... No, no, no, I can’t ......Tsu said never
to look in ...... But.....Darling, why don’t you answer
me?... Tsu, my dear.... what’s happened? What’t the
matter with you? ..... Tsu...... Darling ....... She doesn’t
answer......I want to see .....I want to see..... I’ll take a
short look, may I, Tsu?.....(At last, he peeps through
a crevice in the door to the next room.) Oh, Heavens!
There’s only a crane!......... There’s not a shadow of my
darling! What’s the matter?.......What’s happened?........
my dear, Tsu!.......No, she isn’t there..... Heavens! What
shall I do? She is not.....She is not.......She is not......
Good God!..... (He tries to open the door, but the door
does not open.) Tsu! My dear!......Darling......Where’ve
you gone?......My dear! ..........Darling......(He goes out
aimlessly, looking for Tsu in vain. The sound of the loom
alone continues.)
FADE OUT
(During the darkness a poem is read, doubling the continued
sound of the loom. The meaning of the poem is as follows:
Yohyo, Yohyo, where are you going?
Looking for your Tsu in vain.
In the midst of the dark, snow-blanketed field?
When the morning lights come up in the East,
You are still crying,
And your voice is hoarse.
Soon, it becomes noon,
But you are still crying;-
“My dear, my dear Tsu”.
Before long the dusk falls today,
And the evening glow again begins to burn
In the Western sky, as usual............
The lights come up on the stage, tinged with the sunset
glowing in the West.
The sound of the loom continues from the previous scene,
Sodo and Unzu are looking after Yohyo who has been
taken in their arms from the field where he was lying)
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo! Keep up your nerve!
That’s right.You’re so stupid to lie down in the snow...........
Why did you go to such a far corner of the field?
If we hadn’t found you, you’d have been frozen to death
by now.
Yohyo:
My dear, my dear Tsu...........
Unzu:
Sodo:
Oh, have you come to yourself?
Yohyo! Take courage!
Yohyo:
My dear, my dear Tsu........... (Pause)
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
Well........... I wonder how long will she last weaving the
cloth!
Yes.............Usually she’s through in a night. But this
time it takes all day long.
Yes.............Well, I’ll look in again. (He is going to the
door to the next room)
(The sound of the loom suddenly stops)
Oh, it’s stopped!
She’s coming!
(They go out in a hurry to hide themselves in some near-
by place. Tsu appears carrying two sheets of cloth. She
seems to have become awfully thin)
(shaking up Yohyo) My dear........... My darling..........
Yohyo:
My dear.......My dear Tsu...........
My dear..........My darling...........
Yohyo:
Dear.........Dear Tsu.............(He has come back to himself
at last) Oh, my dear Tsu! (He clings to her, crying)
Tsu, my dear, where have you been?You weren’t here,
I’ve............. I’ve............
Excuse me, my darling, I am sorry to have kept you
waiting. But........Look, these sheets of cloth! I’ve just
finished them. They’re wonderful, aren’t they?
Yohyo:
Really! Oh, you’ve finished them! Thank you! Thank
you, darling!
(She stares motionlessly at Yohyo who is in joy)
Yohyo:
Goodness! It’s really wonderful! It’s awfully beautiful!
Thanks a lot, my dear! Oh, it’s a pair, isn’t it?
Yohyo:
Yes, it’s a pair. That’s why I’ve taken so long. my dear.......
You may go to Kyoto with it now.
Yes, Certainly I’ll go to Kyoto. Tsu, you will go with me,
will you?
(She is weeping)
Yohyo:
Darling, we shall go together to look around the sights of
Kyoto in blossom time, won’t we?
-My darling.......You saw me while weaving after all..........
Yohyo:
Now, I’d like to go to Kyoto as soon as possible! My dear,
these stuffs are pretty well finished- don’t you think so?
After all I had asked you .................After all you had
promised faithfully..........Why- why did you look in at
me? Why did you do it, my darling?
Yohyo:
Well! What are you weeping for, darling?
I wished I could have lived with you forever, forever............
But.........Please, my darling. I beg you to keep one of
these –this one- keep it with you as a treasure..........
Because I have woven it with my whole heart...............
Yohyo:
Yes, this is really wonderfully done!
Yohyo:
(Taking hold of his shoulders) Please keep it with
you.......... Please treaure it always!
(like a child) Yes, I’ll treasure it- of course I will! I’ll
always obey you by all means.Then, dear Tsu, you’ll
come with me to Kyoto, won’t you?
No, my darling, I can’t.............. (She stands up to her
feet with a sad smile.She seems to have become white
suddenly.) I’ve grown thin because of this .............I’ve
used up all the feathers I can possibly spare.......... Now I
have just enough left to fly.......... (She smiles sadly)
Yohyo:
(sensing something unhappy) My dear- dear Tsu......(He
holds on to her- but in vain. His arms have just grasped
the air)
My darling, Yohyo............. Good luck!........... Please,
live long- forever......
Yohyo:
.......(The children’s song is heard from a distance
“Jiyan Ni Kiseru Futo Nuuno
Bayan Ni Kiseru Futo Nuuno
Chin Kara Kan Kara
Ton Ton Ton.............”)
Alas! I have to say good bye to my children, too.......
How many times I used to play with them, singing that
old song..........My darling, Yohyo, please never, never
forget me! I’ll never forget you, either ..........These
few days- it’s only a short time- I’ve been really happy-
wrapped up in your love, and singing and playing with the
children..........I’ll never, never forget these happy days-
wherever I go – and forever..............
Yohyo:
Tsu-darling................Where are you going?
Please, never put me out of your mind , my darling.............
And –please, keep the one piece of cloth with you as a
treasure?
Yohyo:
I say- my darling....................
Good-bye, My Love..........Good luck..........
Yohyo:
Wait, Darling! just a minute! I’ll go! I’ll go with you!
Yohyo:
Unzu:
Sodo:
No, no you cannot. I can no longer take the shape
of woman. I have to go back again to the old sky by
myself...........Good-bye, my darling.......Good luck.......
Good bye...........Adieu, my Love............(she disappears.)
My dear-dearest...........Tsu............where are you going?
Tsu! Darling!..........Tsu..........(Crying he goes out of the
house)
(Sodo and Unzu rush out of their hiding place to hold him
back.)
(out of breath, to Sodo) Say!.............
(out of breath,too) Yes, she’s gone!.....................
(Yohyo looks dazed in Unzu’s arms. The Children appear
running in.)
Children:
(in unison, as if singing) Tsu-yan, Tsu-yan, let us sing.
Tsu-yan, Tsu-yan, let us sing..........(A deep,long pause)
Children: Are you not in, Tsu-yan?...........We’re sorry!...........(To
Yohyo) Yohyo, where’d she gone? When’s she coming
back?
Yohyo:
(toward the interior of the house, timidly and fearfully)
say.................Tsu.............darling...............Here
children........They want you to sing the song as usual........
Tsu..................Darling...........
(A deep and long pause)
One of the children. (pointing up at the sky) Look! a
crane! A crane’s flying!
Sodo:
Unzu:
Oh! The crane!.................
Goodness!..................
Children: Yes, a crane! There’s a crane! A crane’s flying! (They run
away following the shadow of the crane)
Unzu:
Sodo:
Sodo:
Unzu:
Yohyo:
Yohyo! Look, the crane!
It’s flying crookedly! (Pause)
(half to himself) Well, now, it’s very nice to have got two
pieces of the cloth- God bless us! (He tries to take the
stuffs off from Yohyo’s hands, but unconsciously Yohyo
does not let them loose.)
(Following the crane with his eyes while holding Yohyo in
his arms) Look! It’s flying away! It’s becoming small!
Tsu!.............Tsu!.............My dear!...........(He takes a few
stambling steps as if to follow in the direction of the
crane, and halts, grasping the stuffs tightly)
(Sodo also turns his eyes in that direction, and all eyes
are riveted on a distant point in the sky. The children’s
song begins faintly in the distance.)
CURTAIN
The Bear - Anton Chekhov
Translated by Julius West.
CHARACTERS
ELENA IVANOVNA POPOVA, a landowning little widow, with
dimples on her cheeks
GRIGORY STEPANOVITCH SMIRNOV, a middle-aged landowner
LUKA, Popova’s aged footman
[A drawing-room in POPOVA’S house.]
[POPOVA is in deep mourning and has her eyes fixed on a photograph.
LUKA is haranguing her.]
LUKA.
It isn’t right, madam.... You’re just destroying yourself. The maid and
the cook have gone off fruit picking, every living being is rejoicing,
even the cat understands how to enjoy herself and walks about in the
yard, catching midges; only you sit in this room all day, as if this was a
convent, and don’t take any pleasure. Yes, really! I reckon it’s a whole
year that you haven’t left the house!
POPOVA.
I shall never go out.... Why should I? My life is already at an end. He
is in his grave, and I have buried myself between four walls.... We are
both dead.
LUKA.
Well, there you are! Nicolai Mihailovitch is dead, well, it’s the will of
God, and may his soul rest in peace.... You’ve mourned him--and quite
right. But you can’t go on weeping and wearing and mourning for ever.
My old woman died too, when her time came. Well? I grieved over her,
I wept for a month, and that’s enough for her, but if I’ve got to weep for
a whole age, well, the old woman isn’t worth it.
[Sighs]
You’ve forgotten all your neighbours. You don’t go anywhere, and you
see nobody. We live, so to speak, like spiders, and never see the light.
The mice have eaten my livery. It isn’t as if there were no good people
around, for the district’s full of them. There’s a regiment quartered at
Riblov, and the officers are such beauties--you can never gaze your fill
at them. And, every Friday, there’s a ball at the camp, and every day the
soldier’s band plays.... Eh, my lady! You’re young and beautiful, with
roses in your cheek--if you only took a little pleasure. Beauty won’t last
long, you know. In ten years’ time you’ll want to be a pea-hen yourself
among the officers, but they won’t look at you, it will be too late.
POPOVA.
[With determination]
I must ask you never to talk to me about it! You know that when Nicolai
Mihailovitch died, life lost all its meaning for me. I vowed never to
the end of my days to cease to wear mourning, or to see the light....
You hear? Let his ghost see how well I love him.... Yes, I know it’s
no secret to you that he was often unfair to me, cruel, and... and even
unfaithful, but I shall be true till death, and show him how I can love.
There, beyond the grave, he will see me as I was before his death....
LUKA.
Instead of talking like that you ought to go and have a walk in the
garden, or else order Toby or Giant to be harnessed, and then drive out
to see some of the neighbours.
POPOVA.
[Weeps.]
LUKA.
Madam! Dear madam! What is it? Bless you!
POPOVA.
He was so fond of Toby! He always used to ride on him to the
Korchagins and Vlasovs. How well he could ride! What grace there
was in his figure when he pulled at the reins with all his strength! Do
you remember? Toby, Toby! Tell them to give him an extra feed of oats.
LUKA.
Yes, madam.
[A bell rings noisily.]
POPOVA.
[Shaking]
Who’s that? Tell them that I receive nobody.
LUKA.
Yes, madam.
[Exit.]
POPOVA.
[Looks at the photograph]
You will see, Nicolas, how I can love and forgive.... My love will die
out with me, only when this poor heart will cease to beat.
[Laughs through her tears]
And aren’t you ashamed? I am a good and virtuous little wife. I’ve
locked myself in, and will be true to you till the grave, and you... aren’t
you ashamed, you bad child? You deceived me, had rows with me, left
me alone for weeks on end....
[LUKA enters in consternation.]
LUKA.
Madam, somebody is asking for you. He wants to see you....
POPOVA.
But didn’t you tell him that since the death of my husband I’ve stopped
receiving?
LUKA.
I did, but he wouldn’t even listen; says that it’s a very pressing affair.
POPOVA.
I do not re-ceive!
LUKA.
I told him so, but the... the devil... curses and pushes himself right in....
He’s in the dining-room now.
POPOVA.
[Annoyed]
Very well, ask him in.... What manners!
[Exit LUKA]
How these people annoy me! What does he want of me? Why should
he disturb my peace?
[Sighs]
No, I see that I shall have to go into a convent after all.
[Thoughtfully]
Yes, into a convent....
[Enter LUKA with SMIRNOV.]
SMIRNOV.
[To LUKA]
You fool, you’re too fond of talking.... Ass!
[Sees POPOVA and speaks with respect]
Madam, I have the honour to present myself, I am Grigory Stepanovitch
Smirnov, landowner and retired lieutenant of artillery! I am compelled
to disturb you on a very pressing affair.
POPOVA.
[Not giving him her hand]
What do you want?
SMIRNOV.
Your late husband, with whom I had the honour of being acquainted,
died in my debt for one thousand two hundred roubles, on two bills of
exchange. As I’ve got to pay the interest on a mortgage to-morrow, I’ve
come to ask you, madam, to pay me the money to-day.
POPOVA.
One thousand two hundred....And what was my husband in debt to you
SMIRNOV.
He used to buy oats from me.
POPOVA.
[Sighing, to LUKA]
So don’t you forget, Luka, to give Toby an extra feed of oats.
[Exit LUKA]
If Nicolai Mihailovitch died in debt to you, then I shall certainly pay
you, but you must excuse me to-day, as I haven’t any spare cash. The
day after to-morrow my steward will be back from town, and I’ll give
him instructions to settle your account, but at the moment I cannot do as
you wish.... Moreover, it’s exactly seven months to-day since the death
of my husband, and I’m in a state of mind which absolutely prevents
me from giving money matters my attention.
SMIRNOV.
And I’m in a state of mind which, if I don’t pay the interest due to-
morrow, will force me to make a graceful exit from this life feet first.
They’ll take my estate!
POPOVA.
You’ll have your money the day after to-morrow.
SMIRNOV.
I don’t want the money the day after tomorrow, I want it to-day.
POPOVA.
You must excuse me, I can’t pay you.
SMIRNOV.
And I can’t wait till after to-morrow.
POPOVA.
Well, what can I do, if I haven’t the money now!
SMIRNOV.
You mean to say, you can’t pay me?
POPOVA.
I can’t.
SMIRNOV.
Hm! Is that the last word you’ve got to say?
POPOVA.
Yes, the last word.
SMIRNOV.
The last word? Absolutely your last?
POPOVA.
Absolutely.
SMIRNOV.
Thank you so much. I’ll make a note of it.
[Shrugs his shoulders]
And then people want me to keep calm! I meet a man on the road, and
he asks me “Why are you always so angry, Grigory Stepanovitch?” But
how on earth am I not to get angry? I want the money desperately. I
rode out yesterday, early in the morning, and called on all my debtors,
and not a single one of them paid up! I was just about dead-beat after
it all, slept, goodness knows where, in some inn, kept by a Jew, with a
vodka-barrel by my head. At last I get here, seventy versts from home,
and hope to get something, and I am received by you with a “state of
mind”! How shouldn’t I get angry.
POPOVA.
I thought I distinctly said my steward will pay you when he returns
from town.
SMIRNOV.
I didn’t come to your steward, but to you! What the devil, excuse my
saying so, have I to do with your steward!
POPOVA.
Excuse me, sir, I am not accustomed to listen to such expressions or to
such a tone of voice. I want to hear no more.
[Makes a rapid exit.]
SMIRNOV.
Well, there! “A state of mind.”... “Husband died seven months ago!”
Must I pay the interest, or mustn’t I? I ask you: Must I pay, or must
I not? Suppose your husband is dead, and you’ve got a state of mind,
and nonsense of that sort.... And your steward’s gone away somewhere,
devil take him, what do you want me to do? Do you think I can fly away
from my creditors in a balloon, or what? Or do you expect me to go and
run my head into a brick wall? I go to Grusdev and he isn’t at home,
Yaroshevitch has hidden himself, I had a violent row with Kuritsin and
nearly threw him out of the window, Mazugo has something the matter
with his bowels, and this woman has “a state of mind.” Not one of the
swine wants to pay me! Just because I’m too gentle with them, because
I’m a rag, just weak wax in their hands! I’m much too gentle with
them! Well, just you wait! You’ll find out what I’m like! I shan’t let you
play about with me, confound it! I shall jolly well stay here until she
pays! Brr!... How angry I am to-day, how angry I am! All my inside is
quivering with anger, and I can’t even breathe.... Foo, my word, I even
feel sick!
[Yells]
Waiter!
[Enter LUKA.]
LUKA.
What is it?
SMIRNOV.
Get me some kvass or water!
[Exit LUKA]
What a way to reason! A man is in desperate need of his money, and she
won’t pay it because, you see, she is not disposed to attend to money
matters!... That’s real silly feminine logic. That’s why I never did like,
and don’t like now, to have to talk to women. I’d rather sit on a barrel of
gunpowder than talk to a woman. Brr!... I feel quite chilly--and it’s all
on account of that little bit of fluff! I can’t even see one of these poetic
creatures from a distance without breaking out into a cold sweat out of
sheer anger. I can’t look at them.
[Enter LUKA with water.]
LUKA.
Madam is ill and will see nobody.
SMIRNOV.
Get out!
[Exit LUKA]
Ill and will see nobody! No, it’s all right, you don’t see me.... I’m going
to stay and will sit here till you give me the money. You can be ill for
a week, if you like, and I’ll stay here for a week.... If you’re ill for a
year--I’ll stay for a year. I’m going to get my own, my dear! You don’t
get at me with your widow’s weeds and your dimpled cheeks! I know
those dimples!
[Shouts through the window]
Simeon, take them out! We aren’t going away at once! I’m staying
here! Tell them in the stable to give the horses some oats! You fool,
you’ve let the near horse’s leg get tied up in the reins again!
[Teasingly]
“Never mind....” I’ll give it you. “Never mind.”
[Goes away from the window]
Oh, it’s bad.... The heat’s frightful, nobody pays up. I slept badly, and
on top of everything else here’s a bit of fluff in mourning with “a state
of mind.”... My head’s aching.... Shall I have some vodka, what? Yes,
I think I will.
[Yells]
Waiter!
[Enter LUKA. ]
LUKA.
What is it?
SMIRNOV.
A glass of vodka!
[Exit LUKA]
[Sits and inspects himself]
I must say I look well! Dust all over, boots dirty, unwashed, unkempt,
straw on my waistcoat.... The dear lady may well have taken me for a
brigand.
[Yawns]
It’s rather impolite to come into a drawing-room in this state, but it
can’t be helped.... I am not here as a visitor, but as a creditor, and there’s
no dress specially prescribed for creditors....
[Enter LUKA with the vodka.]
LUKA.
You allow yourself to go very far, sir....
SMIRNOV
[Angrily]
What?
LUKA.
I... er... nothing... I really...
SMIRNOV.
Whom are you talking to? Shut up!
LUKA.
[Aside]
The devil’s come to stay.... Bad luck that brought him....
[Exit.]
SMIRNOV.
Oh, how angry I am! So angry that I think I could grind the whole
world to dust.... I even feel sick....
[Yells]
Waiter!
[Enter POPOVA.]
POPOVA.
[Her eyes downcast]
Sir, in my solitude I have grown unaccustomed to the masculine voice,
and I can’t stand shouting. I must ask you not to disturb my peace.
SMIRNOV.
Pay me the money, and I’ll go.
POPOVA.
I told you perfectly plainly; I haven’t any money to spare; wait until the
day after to-morrow.
SMIRNOV.
And I told you perfectly plainly I don’t want the money the day after
to-morrow, but to-day. If you don’t pay me to-day, I’ll have to hang
myself to-morrow.
POPOVA.
But what can I do if I haven’t got the money? You’re so strange!
SMIRNOV.
Then you won’t pay me now? Eh?
POPOVA.
I can’t.
SMIRNOV.
In that case I stay here and shall wait until I get it. [Sits down] You’re
going to pay me the day after to-morrow? Very well! I’ll stay here until
the day after to-morrow. I’ll sit here all the time.... [Jumps up] I ask
you: Have I got to pay the interest to-morrow, or haven’t I? Or do you
think I’m doing this for a joke?
POPOVA.
Please don’t shout! This isn’t a stable!
SMIRNOV.
I wasn’t asking you about a stable, but whether I’d got my interest to
pay to-morrow or not?
POPOVA.
You don’t know how to behave before women!
SMIRNOV.
No, I do know how to behave before women!
POPOVA.
No, you don’t! You’re a rude, ill-bred man! Decent people don’t talk to
a woman like that!
SMIRNOV.
What a business! How do you want me to talk to you? In French, or
what?
[Loses his temper and lisps]
_Madame, je vous prie_.... How happy I am that you don’t pay me....
Ah, pardon. I have disturbed you! Such lovely weather to-day! And
how well you look in mourning!
[Bows.]
POPOVA.
That’s silly and rude.
SMIRNOV.
[Teasing her]
Silly and rude! I don’t know how to behave before women! Madam,
in my time I’ve seen more women than you’ve seen sparrows! Three
times I’ve fought duels on account of women. I’ve refused twelve
women, and nine have refused me! Yes! There was a time when I
played the fool, scented myself, used honeyed words, wore jewellery,
made beautiful bows. I used to love, to suffer, to sigh at the moon,
to get sour, to thaw, to freeze.... I used to love passionately, madly,
every blessed way, devil take me; I used to chatter like a magpie about
emancipation, and wasted half my wealth on tender feelings, but now-
-you must excuse me! You won’t get round me like that now! I’ve had
enough! Black eyes, passionate eyes, ruby lips, dimpled cheeks, the
moon, whispers, timid breathing--I wouldn’t give a brass farthing for
the lot, madam! Present company always excepted, all women, great or
little, are insincere, crooked, backbiters, envious, liars to the marrow of
their bones, vain, trivial, merciless, unreasonable, and, as far as this is
concerned
[taps his forehead]
excuse my outspokenness, a sparrow can give ten points to any
philosopher in petticoats you like to name! You look at one of these
poetic creatures: all muslin, an ethereal demi-goddess, you have a
million transports of joy, and you look into her soul--and see a common
crocodile!
[He grips the back of a chair; the chair creaks and breaks]
But the most disgusting thing of all is that this crocodile for some
reason or other imagines that its chef d’oeuvre, its privilege and
monopoly, is its tender feelings. Why, confound it, hang me on that
nail feet upwards, if you like, but have you met a woman who can love
anybody except a lapdog? When she’s in love, can she do anything but
snivel and slobber? While a man is suffering and making sacrifices all
her love expresses itself in her playing about with her scarf, and trying
to hook him more firmly by the nose. You have the misfortune to be a
woman, you know from yourself what is the nature of woman. Tell me
truthfully, have you ever seen a woman who was sincere, faithful, and
constant? You haven’t! Only freaks and old women are faithful and
constant! You’ll meet a cat with a horn or a white woodcock sooner
than a constant woman!
POPOVA.
Then, according to you, who is faithful and constant in love? Is it the
SMIRNOV.
Yes, the man!
POPOVA.
The man!
[Laughs bitterly]
Men are faithful and constant in love! What an idea!
[With heat]
What right have you to talk like that? Men are faithful and constant!
Since we are talking about it, I’ll tell you that of all the men I knew and
know, the best was my late husband.... I loved him passionately with
all my being, as only a young and imaginative woman can love, I gave
him my youth, my happiness, my life, my fortune, I breathed in him, I
worshipped him as if I were a heathen, and... and what then? This best
of men shamelessly deceived me at every step! After his death I found
in his desk a whole drawerful of love-letters, and when he was alive--
it’s an awful thing to remember!--he used to leave me alone for weeks
at a time, and make love to other women and betray me before my very
eyes; he wasted my money, and made fun of my feelings.... And, in
spite of all that, I loved him and was true to him. And not only that, but,
now that he is dead, I am still true and constant to his memory. I have
shut myself for ever within these four walls, and will wear these weeds
to the very end....
SMIRNOV.
[Laughs contemptuously]
Weeds!... I don’t understand what you take me for. As if I don’t know
why you wear that black domino and bury yourself between four walls!
I should say I did! It’s so mysterious, so poetic! When some junker
[Note: So in the original.] or some tame poet goes past your windows
he’ll think: “There lives the mysterious Tamara who, for the love of her
husband, buried herself between four walls.” We know these games!
POPOVA.
[Exploding]
What? How dare you say all that to me?
SMIRNOV.
You may have buried yourself alive, but you haven’t forgotten to pow-
der your face!
POPOVA.
How dare you speak to me like that?
SMIRNOV.
Please don’t shout, I’m not your steward! You must allow me to call
things by their real names. I’m not a woman, and I’m used to saying
what I think straight out! Don’t you shout, either!
POPOVA.
I’m not shouting, it’s you! Please leave me alone!
SMIRNOV.
Pay me my money and I’ll go.
POPOVA.
I shan’t give you any money!
SMIRNOV.
Oh, no, you will.
POPOVA.
I shan’t give you a farthing, just to spite you. You leave me alone!
SMIRNOV.
I have not the pleasure of being either your husband or your fiance, so
please don’t make scenes.
[Sits]
I don’t like it.
POPOVA.
[Choking with rage]
So you sit down?
SMIRNOV.
I do.
POPOVA.
I ask you to go away!
SMIRNOV.
Give me my money....
[Aside]
Oh, how angry I am! How angry I am!
POPOVA.
I don’t want to talk to impudent scoundrels! Get out of this!
[Pause]
Aren’t you going? No?
SMIRNOV.
POPOVA.
SMIRNOV.
POPOVA.
Very well then!
[Rings, enter LUKA]
Luka, show this gentleman out!
LUKA.
[Approaches SMIRNOV]
Would you mind going out, sir, as you’re asked to! You needn’t...
SMIRNOV.
[Jumps up]
Shut up! Who are you talking to? I’ll chop you into pieces!
LUKA.
[Clutches at his heart]
Little fathers!... What people!...
[Falls into a chair]
Oh, I’m ill, I’m ill! I can’t breathe!
POPOVA.
Where’s Dasha? Dasha!
[Shouts]
Dasha! Pelageya! Dasha!
[Rings.]
LUKA.
Oh! They’ve all gone out to pick fruit.... There’s nobody at home! I’m
ill! Water!
POPOVA.
Get out of this, now.
SMIRNOV.
Can’t you be more polite?
POPOVA.
[Clenches her fists and stamps her foot]
You’re a boor! A coarse bear! A Bourbon! A monster!
SMIRNOV.
What? What did you say?
POPOVA.
I said you are a bear, a monster!
SMIRNOV.
[Approaching her]
May I ask what right you have to insult me?
POPOVA.
And suppose I am insulting you? Do you think I’m afraid of you?
SMIRNOV.
And do you think that just because you’re a poetic creature you can
insult me with impunity? Eh? We’ll fight it out!
LUKA.
Little fathers!... What people!... Water!
SMIRNOV.
Pistols!
POPOVA.
Do you think I’m afraid of you just because you have large fists and a
bull’s throat? Eh? You Bourbon!
SMIRNOV.
We’ll fight it out! I’m not going to be insulted by anybody, and I don’t
care if you are a woman, one of the “softer sex,” indeed!
POPOVA.
[Trying to interrupt him]
Bear! Bear! Bear!
SMIRNOV.
It’s about time we got rid of the prejudice that only men need pay for
their insults. Devil take it, if you want equality of rights you can have
it. We’re going to fight it out!
POPOVA.
With pistols? Very well!
SMIRNOV.
This very minute.
POPOVA.
This very minute! My husband had some pistols.... I’ll bring them here.
[Is going, but turns back]
What pleasure it will give me to put a bullet into your thick head! Devil
take you!
[Exit.]
SMIRNOV.
I’ll bring her down like a chicken! I’m not a little boy or a sentimental
puppy; I don’t care about this “softer sex.”
LUKA.
Gracious little fathers!...
[Kneels]
Have pity on a poor old man, and go away from here! You’ve fright-
ened her to death, and now you want to shoot her!
SMIRNOV.
[Not hearing him]
If she fights, well that’s equality of rights, emancipation, and all that!
Here the sexes are equal! I’ll shoot her on principle! But what a woman!
[Parodying her]
“Devil take you! I’ll put a bullet into your thick head.” Eh? How she
reddened, how her cheeks shone!... She accepted my challenge! My
word, it’s the first time in my life that I’ve seen....
LUKA.
Go away, sir, and I’ll always pray to God for you!
SMIRNOV.
She is a woman! That’s the sort I can understand! A real woman! Not
a sour-faced jellybag, but fire, gunpowder, a rocket! I’m even sorry to
have to kill her!
LUKA.
[Weeps]
Dear... dear sir, do go away!
SMIRNOV.
I absolutely like her! Absolutely! Even though her cheeks are dimpled,
I like her! I’m almost ready to let the debt go... and I’m not angry any
longer.... Wonderful woman!
[Enter POPOVA with pistols.]
POPOVA.
Here are the pistols.... But before we fight you must show me how to
fire. I’ve never held a pistol in my hands before.
LUKA.
Oh, Lord, have mercy and save her.... I’ll go and find the coachman and
the gardener.... Why has this infliction come on us....
[Exit.]
SMIRNOV.
[Examining the pistols]
You see, there are several sorts of pistols.... There are Mortimer pistols,
specially made for duels, they fire a percussion-cap. These are Smith
and Wesson revolvers, triple action, with extractors.... These are excel-
lent pistols. They can’t cost less than ninety roubles the pair.... You
must hold the revolver like this....
[Aside]
Her eyes, her eyes! What an inspiring woman!
POPOVA.
Like this?
SMIRNOV.
Yes, like this.... Then you cock the trigger, and take aim like this.... Put
your head back a little! Hold your arm out properly.... Like that.... Then
you press this thing with your finger--and that’s all. The great thing is
to keep cool and aim steadily.... Try not to jerk your arm.
POPOVA.
Very well.... It’s inconvenient to shoot in a room, let’s go into the gar-
SMIRNOV.
Come along then. But I warn you, I’m going to fire in the air.
POPOVA.
That’s the last straw! Why?
SMIRNOV.
Because... because... it’s my affair.
POPOVA.
Are you afraid? Yes? Ah! No, sir, you don’t get out of it! You come with
me! I shan’t have any peace until I’ve made a hole in your forehead...
that forehead which I hate so much! Are you afraid?
SMIRNOV.
Yes, I am afraid.
POPOVA.
You lie! Why won’t you fight?
SMIRNOV.
Because... because you... because I like you.
POPOVA.
[Laughs]
He likes me! He dares to say that he likes me!
[Points to the door]
That’s the way.
SMIRNOV.
[Loads the revolver in silence, takes his cap and goes to the door. There
he stops for half a minute, while they look at each other in silence, then
he hesitatingly approaches POPOVA]
Listen.... Are you still angry? I’m devilishly annoyed, too... but, do you
understand... how can I express myself?... The fact is, you see, it’s like
this, so to speak....
[Shouts]
Well, is it my fault that I like you?
[He snatches at the back of a chair; the chair creaks and breaks]
Devil take it, how I’m smashing up your furniture! I like you! Do you
understand? I... I almost love you!
POPOVA.
Get away from me--I hate you!
SMIRNOV.
God, what a woman! I’ve never in my life seen one like her! I’m lost!
Done for! Fallen into a mousetrap, like a mouse!
POPOVA.
Stand back, or I’ll fire!
SMIRNOV.
Fire, then! You can’t understand what happiness it would be to die be-
fore those beautiful eyes, to be shot by a revolver held in that little,
velvet hand.... I’m out of my senses! Think, and make up your mind at
once, because if I go out we shall never see each other again! Decide
now.... I am a landowner, of respectable character, have an income of
ten thousand a year. I can put a bullet through a coin tossed into the air
as it comes down.... I own some fine horses.... Will you be my wife?
POPOVA.
[Indignantly shakes her revolver]
Let’s fight! Let’s go out!
SMIRNOV.
I’m mad.... I understand nothing.
[Yells]
Waiter, water!
POPOVA.
[Yells]
Let’s go out and fight!
SMIRNOV.
I’m off my head, I’m in love like a boy, like a fool!
[Snatches her hand, she screams with pain]
I love you!
[Kneels]
I love you as I’ve never loved before! I’ve refused twelve women, nine
have refused me, but I never loved one of them as I love you.... I’m
weak, I’m wax, I’ve melted.... I’m on my knees like a fool, offering
you my hand.... Shame, shame! I haven’t been in love for five years,
I’d taken a vow, and now all of a sudden I’m in love, like a fish out of
water! I offer you my hand. Yes or no? You don’t want me? Very well!
[Gets up and quickly goes to the door.]
POPOVA.
Stop.
SMIRNOV.
[Stops]
Well?
POPOVA.
Nothing, go away.... No, stop.... No, go away, go away! I hate you! Or
no.... Don’t go away! Oh, if you knew how angry I am, how angry I am!
[Throws her revolver on the table]
My fingers have swollen because of all this....
[Tears her handkerchief in temper]
What are you waiting for? Get out!
SMIRNOV.
Good-bye.
POPOVA.
Yes, yes, go away!...
[Yells]
Where are you going? Stop.... No, go away. Oh, how angry I am! Don’t
come near me, don’t come near me!
SMIRNOV.
[Approaching her]
How angry I am with myself! I’m in love like a student, I’ve been on
my knees....
[Rudely]
I love you! What do I want to fall in love with you for? To-morrow I’ve
got to pay the interest, and begin mowing, and here you....
[Puts his arms around her]
I shall never forgive myself for this....
POPOVA.
Get away from me! Take your hands away! I hate you! Let’s go and
fight!
[A prolonged kiss. Enter LUKA with an axe, the GARDENER with a
rake, the COACHMAN with a pitchfork, and WORKMEN with poles.]
LUKA.
[Catches sight of the pair kissing]
Little fathers!
[Pause.]
POPOVA.
[Lowering her eyes]
Luka, tell them in the stables that Toby isn’t to have any oats at all to-
[Curtain.]
[The end]
Anton Chekhov’s play: Bear
Annexure:
Proposed Term-wise Breakdown of the Syllabus
Grade Term Scheme of Work
Poetry
Periods
* The Eagle
* To the Evening Star
* Farewell to Barn and Stack and Tree
Prose
* The Lumber Room
* The Lahore Attack
Poetry
* Big Match- 1983
* The Terrorist, He’s Watching
* The Clown’s Wife
* The Huntsman
Prose
* The Nightingale and the Rose
Novel
* One out of three to be selected
Poetry
* To the Nile
* A Bird Came Down the Walk
* Breakfast
* Once Upon a Time
Prose
* An extract from ‘Wave’
Drama
* The Bear
Poetry
* I know Why the Caged Bird Sings
* War is Kind
* Richard Cory
* The Camel’s Hump
Drama
* The Twilight of a Crane
Poetry
* The Earthen Goblet
* Father and Son
* Upside-Down
Drama
* The Twilight of a Crane
Novel
* Selected Novel Continued
Poetry
* Fear
* Two’s Company
Novel
* Selected Novel Continued
Selected novel continued