Index
01 Social Security
02 Contemporary Changes
03 Democratic Governance
29-71
72-95
04 Local Government Institutions
96-116
05 Conflict Resolution
06 World of Work
117-126
127-162
Social Security
Introduction
Working together is a basic feature that can be seen in a society. Each
individual in a society has the right to a life of freedom away from fear and
suspicion. Having established that right, social security is strengthened.
Family, school, religious institutions and social institutions render a
special service to establish social security. The government has also established
various institutions and special mechanisms to ensure social security.
Several factors contribute to social security. Citizens in a society need to
be well-educated and self disciplined. They need to show respect towards others
in dealing with them. These factors contribute heavily to social security in a
cohesive multi-cultural society.
Social security is a factor that affects the personal development, social
development and national development in a society. By studying this chapter, you
will be able to achieve a wide knowledge about the following:
Individual and society
² Social security
² The mechanisms as well as laws and rules that are utilized to establish social
Institutes that contribute to social security
security
² Duties and responsibilities of an individual to influence social security
1.1 Individual and Society
1.1.1 Introducing society
Family is the basic unit in a society. Society is a collection of several families.
A group of people living in certain geographical region working in collaboration
to achieve their various needs is a basic feature of a society. They establish various
institutes, societies and organizations for that. Accordingly, society is a collection
of individuals and organizations.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Individual
Family
Society
Every person is a member of some society. They maintain frequent inter
relationships to fulfill their needs.
Each society has its own customs, rules and regulations, acceptances,
ethics, agreements and traditions. They are common features to all societies. These
common features contribute to make the societies colourful.
By nature, societies of the modern day are very complex. Therefore, to
fulfill their needs, it has become very necessary for individuals to maintain cordial
relationships with others. Everyone needs the help of different people and social
institutions. Strong relationships between individuals in a society contribute to
peaceful co-existence.
1.1.2 Social security
Society must ensure protection and security for a person to live free from
doubt and fear, safeguarding one's interests. Simply, it can be introduced as social
security. Establishing social protection and good existence to the maximum is
essential for the social development.
People need to accept and honour the rules and regulations in any society.
This ensures social security. At the same time, to ensure social security, it is essential
to organize both people and institutions at different levels.
Both visionaries and groups looking far into the future, contribute to the
creation of a strong, secure society.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Abraham Lincoln (1809 - 1865) is a former
president of the United States of America.
He worked hard to establish social security
of millions of people who suffered as slaves
by abolishing slavery in the USA. He
directly opposed the spreading of slavery
and denounced ''Free labour in free soil'' too. He is
a prudent leader who established social security by
being the emancipator of millions of slaves in 1863.
''Whatever you are be a good one'' is one of his
famous sayings.
Activity 1.1
Abraham Lincoln
Explain in your own words what you 'Social Security' means.
1.1.3 Institutions that contribute towards the social security and services
rendered
In any society there are a number of institutions that contribute to the
establishment of the social security. Examples for some of them are given below:
Family
Social
institutions
Institutions
that affect the
social security
School
Religious
institutions
For free distribution
For free distribution
1.1.3.1 The role played by the family towards social security
Let us recall the lesson 'Our Family'
we have learned for Civic Education in
Grade 7. There, you had a chance to study
tasks
information about nature,
and the important role played by family.
Accordingly, family renders a special task
for the establishment of social security. The
basic training of adjusting an individual to the
society is given in the family. Discipline and
accepted behaviours, activities, role models
and attitudes among members in a family help create a responsible individual. The
responsibility of a family is to provide a disciplined and cultured individual to
society. Nutrition, security, love, compassion, mercy, kindness and models received
by an individual, as a member of a family help produce confident, balanced
individual to society. This ensures protection and security too. In living together as
members of a family, common feelings are developed and they directly contribute
to the social security too.
Happy family
Responsibilities
of 'family' social
security
Developing healthy relationships among members
Conducting healthy relationships with relatives and
neighbours
Maintaining healthy relationships with different individuals
Guiding towards better socialization
Improving qualities like love, compassion and kindness
Ensuring security and protection
Preventing use of alcohol, drugs and anti-social misconducts
Adapting to protect some attributes of the culture
Encouraging listening to others and respecting their views
Provision of necessary training to work in co-operation with
each other
Leading through setting example
Directing to follow the instructions given by the elders
towards personal welfare
Encouraging self control and emotions
Guiding towards positive thinking about individuals and
society
Preparing for a bearable, simple life style
Explaining the need to be law-abiding
For free distribution
For free distribution
It is necessary to provide the background for individuals to complete with
such qualities to be raised in each family. Then, social security is well established.
Given below is an example to revel how family can contribute to social security:
As a small child, Thomas Alwa Edison, came
home from school one day and handed over a
letter to his mother. He said, “Mom, my teacher
gave me this letter. She asked me to give it to
you. She wanted only you to read it. What’s in
this letter?”
She started reading the letter. Her eyes welled with tears
as she read the letter. She read out aloud to her child…
“Your son is a genius. This school is too small for him and
doesn’t have good enough teachers to train him. Please
keep him at home and teach him yourself.” What was
written in the letter was carried out as advised.
Thomas Alwa Edison
who invented the light
bulb (1841-1931)
Many years later, after Edison’s mother had died, he became the greatest inventor of
the century.
One day he was going through an old trunk and, by chance, he came across the folded
letter that his old teacher wrote to his Mother. He opened it…
The message written in the letter was “Your son is a great fool. We cannot allow
him to continue his studies in this school. Please keep him at home and teach him
yourself.”
After reading the letter Edison became emotional and then wrote in his diary:
“Thomas Alwa Edison was a great fool whose mother turned him into the genius of
the century.”
1.1.3.2 The contribution from school towards social security
From the family, children next step
into school society. The school too shares
equal responsibility like the family towards
social security. School can be introduced
as a well organized institution where the
necessary background for the establishment
of social security is widely organized.
Knowledge, attitudes, skills and good
discipline you achieved from the school
help you a lot to live as a good citizen in the
society.
For free distribution
A school
For free distribution
Tasks fulfilled
by the school
towards the
social security
Provision of systematic education
Producing fair, social and well-disciplined individuals
Making perfect with competencies
Producing individuals with balanced personality
Teaching to fulfill duties while enjoying rights
Transferring and protection of culture
Teaching to work for the benefit of the society
Explaining the repercussions of the use of liquor and narcotics
and abstaining from it
Make to understand the ill-effects of the anti-social and
misconduct activities and protecting from them
Creation for better socialization
Practising to evaluate equality and controlling emotions
Directing to work collectively and peacefully
Establishment of national harmony, brotherhood and equality
Developing of competencies necessary for the protection of the
environment
Developing values relevant to the religion and ethics
Making aware that every child is important and clever
Read the story given below about a teacher directing a student along the correct
path.
Tim, admitted to Grade 1, showed lots of talents in many subjects. However, in
the 2nd term of Grade 3, his teacher noticed a decline in his interests. The teacher
observed him carefully and compared his continuous assessments during the
previous year. The teacher was anxious to find the reason for Tim's decline in
performances, which were good at the beginning. The teacher got closer to Tim
and wanted to get to know him. She learnt that during the 1st term of Grade 3, Tim's
mother fell ill and had died. The shock and the separation from his mother made Tim
uncomfortable. He was frustrated.
Aware of the reason for Tim’s sudden decline in his work, the teacher became a mother
to Tim. She showered him with love and affection coming from a mother. The teacher
came to be a goddess, more or less. Tim picked up and showed enthusiasm with his studies
again. The school became as pleasant place to him. At the end of the year, the teacher's
table was filled with the presents brought by students. Tim honoured the teacher with a
gift wrapped in a piece of paper. The present was a discolored bangle worn by Tim's
mother. The teacher accepted it with great appreciation.
Time passed. Tim developed many talents while in primary and secondary school. He
successfully completed University education too. The day of his marriage arrived. This
grateful child did not forget his beloved teacher who was like his own mother. She came
for his wedding wearing the bangle given by Tim, years ago.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 1.2
Present creatively the tasks fulfilled by your school for the
establishment of social security.
1.1.3.3 Contributions from the religious places towards the social security
Religious places contribute immensely to build a peaceful society by
establishing good habits and moral values. The primary objective of every religion is
to make people aware of the importance of living co-operatively, harmoniously and
unitedly as good citizens. Establishment of harmony among different religious and
ethnic groups is also an important mission that must be performed by the religious
institutions. Accordingly, religious institutions render an important mission for the
establishment of social security. For that, some examples are given below:
Inculcating of good attitudes
Establishment of discipline and education
Driving towards spiritual development
Producing virtuous citizens
Rescuing people from liquor and narcotics with sound
advice regarding the harm done
Educating people about anti-social behaviour and damages
caused as a result of involvement in such activities and
preventing such acts.
Raising awareness regarding co-operation and assistance
Teaching to use and protect customs and traditions
Setting of correct and positive vision about life
Extending assistance to establish national harmony and
national integration
Working towards the sustainable peace
For free distribution
For free distribution
Rev. Fr. Marceline Jayakody was a
catholic priest, but he had a sound
knowledge of Buddhism. Buddhist
songs that he composed are very
popular. He was called ''Priest in the
temple'' because he worked hard to
bring about unity among religions.
Activity 1.3
Rev. Fr. Marceline Jayakody
1. What are the different religious institutions found in your area?
2. State five tasks rendered by these institutions in common towards
social security.
1.1.3.4 Contribution from social institutions towards the social security
Individuals work in collaboration with social institutions and organizations
to fulfill their various needs. People's needs have become complex and various
institutions and organizations have emerged to fulfil these necessities. Some
examples for such institutions are given below:
Children's
Clubs
Sports Clubs
Student
Councils
Trade
Unions
Cooperative
Societies
Religious
Societies
Social
institutions
organizations
Youth
Councils
Village
Development
Societies
Farming
Societies
Funeral Welfare
Societies
Elders'
Society
Welfare
Societies
For free distribution
For free distribution
Many of these organizations function based on a formal plan and a
constitution. The main objective of them is also to get social welfare improved by
working collaboratively with each other. Thus, social institutions and organizations
established collectively in common render a massive service for ensuring social
security. Several examples for their activities are given below;
Developing of unity among members
Establishing of healthy inter-personal relationships
Practising to respect and to accept others' opinions
Respecting the leadership and fulfilling duties of followers
Fulfillment of social duties and responsibilities
Being law abidingly
Maintaining of social welfare services
Assisting the economic stability
Maintaining of community health services
Conducting awareness programmes on food and nutrition
Assisting to prevent epidemics and making people aware of
getting protected from them
Improvement of soft competencies (such as love, kindness,
compassion, etc.)
Assisting to establish national unity, national cohesion, and
sustainable peace
Guiding to think positively about individuals and the society
Conducting programmes to save the society from liquor,
narcotics, anti social activities and misconducts
Helping individuals in difficult situations such as in funerals
Tasks
performed by
various social
institutions
towards the
social security
Activity 1.4
Collect the information about social institutions that function in
your area and complete the following table.
Name of
organization
Objectives
Activities towards
social security
For free distribution
For free distribution
1.1.5 Liquor and usage of narcotics, anti-social activities and misconducts
Escalating of the use of liquor and narcotics is a main problem faced by
the present society. Anti social and practices of misconduct also have increased
as well. Various programmes are launched by the government to find solutions for
them. Other than that, government institutions, various organizations and many
non-governmental organizations too have launched various activities in this regard.
The use of liquor and drugs directly influences the increase of various
anti-social activities and misconducts. It is a well-known fact that could be seen and
heard through various mass media that use of liquor and narcotics has become the
main factor, influencing the collapse of social security.
The task load performed by family, school, religious institutions and
social institutions to prevent the use of liquor and drugs, anti social activities
and misconducts is highly important for the society. There are many institutions
training to eradicate or curtail such anti social activities for the establishment of
social security.
Some examples for such organizations are shown below:
² National Board of Dangerous Drug Control
² Sri Lanka Police
² National Child Protection Authority
² Department of Probation and Child Care Services
² Liquor and Drug Information Centre
² Non governmental organizations such as Healthy Lanka, Sumithrayo,
Mithuru Mithurio
1.1.6 Law for the social security
Introduction to law
System of all regulations imposed by the State to which all individuals of a
country or society must obey can be simply introduced as law. Law is imposed for
the prevention of unfavorable influences and damages occur in the society when an
individual lives in the society, as well as to ensure peace and security.
Every society must be ruled according to the law in use. The fundamental
responsibility of a government is to protect law and peace in its State. Citizens
are expected to respond and act according to the law. When the law is violated,
punishments are deserving. In every society where the authority of law is empowered
well, justice, peace and social security are preserved.
For free distribution
For free distribution
The duty fulfilled by the government organizations to establish social
security is important. Court, Police and security forces can be cited as examples.
Enacted by government based on authority
Controlling man's behaviour and activities
Violation of law is a punishable offence
Enacting commonly, targeting the well-being of the
society
Changing, according to the changing of social needs
Acting with fair and equality for all
Must be shown clearly and accurately
Acting about all (authority of law)
Law is supreme. It stands above everyone. (Sovereignty
of law)
Some attributes
of law
Sources of law
Law has been enforced for social security and is based on various sources.
Some examples are given below:
² Constitution
² Regulations and Acts
² Customs
² Verdicts from courts
² Opinions of the scholars of law
² Religion
Law is tightly bound with the social needs. This clearly shows, as obeying
and following the law is compulsory to all.
Law is practised in two ways:
1. Domestic law
2. International law
1. Domestic law
The law that is enacted and exercised pertaining within the territorial
boundary of a country is called domestic law. Domestic law varies from country to
country.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Domestic law
Criminal law
The laws that are connected
the offences executed
against the society by an
individual or a group.
Civil law
The laws connected to the
individuals in the society
and offences or disputes and
problems of properties.
² Murder and attempting
to murder
² Plundering
² Raping
² Child abuse
² Kidnapping
² Disappearances
² Drug trafficking
² Robbery
² Agreements
² Family connections
(Divorces, guardianship
of children)
² Heredity
² Ownership claims
² Land disputes
² Recovery of loans
² Compensations
Constitutional law
the State,
The Supreme law which
power
exercises
including
theories of State's
basic
administration
is known
as Constitutional Law.
Through
powers
this,
responsibilities and human
rights of various areas are
shown.
The constitution of 1978
2. International law
The law that is exercised when one country works with another country or
several countries can be simply introduced as international law. Examples for such
several international laws that exercise as international rules are given below;
International human rights law
Immigration and emigration law
International laws connected to the flights
International maritime law
International environment law
International investment law
International problem - solving law
1.1.7 Various institutions which are set to empower the law
1. The court
The jurisdiction, protection of freedom and right of the people in a
democratic country are attended to by the court. Working the court independently
causes to build confidence and respect for the court in citizens.
For free distribution
For free distribution
In Sri Lanka, there are several courts of justice to enforce proper jurisdiction.
Present Judicial system in Sri Lanka
Supreme court
Court of appeal
Provincial high court
High court
District court
Magistrate court
2. Sri Lanka police
Establishment of social security by protecting law
and peace in the country is the main responsibility of the
police. This is the speech presented by Samitha of Grade 9
on 'Sri Lanka Police' at the morning assembly of the school.
Dear teachers and my dear brothers and sisters,
“Dhammo Bhave Rakkathi Dammachari” The one
who behaves according to the Dhamma will be protected
by the Dhamma (Doctrine) itself. This is the motto of the
Police. Today I am going to deliver a speech on Sri Lanka
Police. The main institution that protects us day and night
continuously is Police. It is a great service that the police
do to live us without fear and suspicion from the moment
we awake in the morning and to the moment we go to sleep
at night and from the moment we sleep at night and to the
moment we awake in the morning.
Official symbol of Sri
Lanka Police
It is the police that protect us from thieves, robbers and criminals. Controlling
traffic and helping pedestrians to cross roads are a very common sight in urban
areas. Provision of traffic warden training to students like us is also a great help
rendered by the police.
Provision of security to VIPs, various functions and meetings, guidance
with careful driving could be introduced as special services rendered by the police
for us.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Some main functions of police are to curtail
anti social activities like liquor, narcotics, arrest
culprits and bring them into the strong arm of the
law. Preventing various disputes, conflicts and
terrorist activities are also an important mission of
the police. Police executes all these for the purpose
of ensuring our security. Ensuring the protection of
children like us and women by conducting separate
units for them is a factor to be happy about.
The services rendered by the police in natural
disasters like flood and earth slips are unforgettable.
Further, it must be mentioned here that, the efficient
performance of the police to take threatening
criminals into custody within a short period of time.
There, the functions performed by the police kennel
service also must be commended.
Furthermore, the police executes a great
service by acting rapidly on sudden disasters and
sudden accidents by conducting the 119 service.
We should always respect the police for the
services they render towards our motherland and
ourselves at all times of the day, be it sunshine or
rain or day and night. As well, it is our responsibility
to help the Police always with our assistance to
continue their duties successfully. I mentioned only
a small section of the massive services rendered by
the police for the social security.
Thank you for listening.
A Retired Director General of Police, A.J. Iddamalgoda,
defines the word POLICE as follows;
- Polite
- Obedient
- Loyal
- Intelligent
- Courageous
- Efficient
Whenever it is necessary to establish social security, the Sri Lanka Police
can seek the assistance of the International Police.
For free distribution
For free distribution
An incident related to the Police in the United Kingdom
Hyde Park Corner in the United Kingdom is a place where people
gather freely during week ends. Some enjoy by dancing, singing,
participating in carnivals, delivering public speeches. One day, a person
driving his vehicle near Hyde Park Corner heard a man delivering a public speech
abusing the Police in the United Kingdom as low, mean, corrupted and fraudulent.
The person in the vehicle slowed down the speed to listen to the speech. Suddenly,
he saw a giant policeman speedily making his way towards his vehicle.
He got alarmed thinking that he would be taken offence. The police man
came closer to the vehicle, and said ''Please switch off the engine of your vehicle,
people cannot hear the speech well because of the noise from your vehicle.''
Activity 1.5
List out the duties performed by the Police referring to Samitha's
speech.
Eg - Ensuring peace and public security
3. Attorney General’s Department
The Attorney General’s Department holds the responsibility for all legal
activities of the government. Prosecutions and appearances in cases on behalf of
the government are conducted by this department. The Attorney General who is the
chief legal officer of Sri Lanka is the head of this department. The Attorney General
is appointed by the President with the recommendation of the constitution.
Several Tasks performed by the Attorney General’s Department are given below;
² Provision of necessary legal advice in the lawsuits connected to the
government
² Compiling of all legal activities to the government or against the government
² Appearing for the lawsuits connected to the government or State institutions
² Providing proper legal advice to the Acts to be submitted to the Parliament
² Participation as a partner in the lawsuits prosecuted by the Supreme Court
² Provisions of necessary recommendations to the President to execute the
death penalty which had been committed on a culprit.
For free distribution
For free distribution
4. Government Analyst’s Department
Analytical and specialist advisory services connected to the fields like
forensic science, food science for courts, law imposing institutions and other
institutions are provided by the Government Analyst’s Department.
While “Building of a just and a law abiding society” is the vision of the
Government Analyst’s Department, contribution to the jurisdiction efficiently
and in a justifiable manner is the basic objective. This department possesses the
specialists to examine and to provide the analytical reports on samples produced by
various institutions. There are many institutions that work in collaboration with the
Government Analyst’s Department for the establishment of social security. Some
of them are shown below;
² Court of Law
² The Police Department
² Health Department
² Sri Lanka Standard Institute
² Central Environmental Authority
² Labour Tribunals
² Department of Criminal Investigation
² Department of Customs
² Excise Department
² Sri Lanka Tea Board
5. Department of Prison
The main functions of the Prisons Department are to imprison various
wrongdoers condemned by the law and committed to prison, rehabilitate and release
them to society as just and peaceful citizens with human values. In addition, the
Prisons Department is responsible to keep in custody, those suspected of crimes,
looking after and maintaining them. Researches reveal that a larger percentage of
people sent to prison have not successfully completed school education.
6. Security Forces in Sri Lanka
The security forces deserve an important place as the man institution that
acts to establish social security. To ensure social security, Army, Navy and Air force
have been established under the Ministry of Defense.
Given below are three articles regarding each of these forces published in a
wall-paper by three groups of Grade 9 students.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sri Lanka Army
After the independence, Ceylon Army was
established on 10th October, 1949. Ceylon Army was
renamed as ‘Sri Lanka Army’ in 1972. Provision of
security to the nation on land is the main task of the
Army. Sri Lanka Army that serves under the motto,
“For the Fatherland” is always on alert both in day
and night for the protection of motherland. The
Army is dedicated to protect the land from various
military situations that affect both locally as well as
internationally.
Sri Lanka Navy
Ceylon Navy was established on 09th December,
1950. It is known as Sri Lanka Navy since 1972. ''The
Golden fence around the country'' is the motto of the
Navy. The main task of the Navy is to protect the
motherland from the military threats or outside. Sri
Lanka Navy that works hard fighting with the mighty
ocean provides the protection from the land as well
as from the sea. Working for the prevention of illegal
trading activities like drugs and illegal immigration
that occur along the sea routes are also important tasks
rendered by the Navy. The prevention of illegal fishing
that is conducted, violating the territorial sea limits, is
also an important service of the Navy. Here it must be
appreciated the services rendered by Sri Lanka Navy
in supplying transportation among islands, helping in
disaster situations and rescuing the people caught in
flood, etc.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sri Lanka Air Force
Ceylon Air Force was established on 02nd
March, 1951. It was renamed as “Sri Lanka Air
Force” since 1972. ‘Protect Lanka skies (Surakimu
Lakambara/''C»[øP Áõß£µ¨ø£¨ £õxPõ¨÷£õ®'')
is the motto of the Air Force. Protecting the motherland
from the sky while piercing the whole sky of the country
is the main task of the Sri Lanka Air Force. Except the
protection of the motherland from the threats levelling
from local as well as international warfare, conducting
domestic flights are also an important service of the
Air Force. Provision of aid, saving lives and provision
of security, in the disasters reaching the locations that
can be reached by neither on land nor water are another
important services rendered by the Sri Lanka Air Force.
Apart from that, the Civil Security Force too
renders an important national service to establish social
security by helping the three Forces.
The three forces in Sri Lanka render a dignified
service to the country and the nation. The main
responsibility of the forces is the safeguarding of
unitary and territorial integrity of Sri Lanka. The three
forces render a special task to the motherland while preventing various accidents,
hazards and establishing social security by protecting land, sea and sky.
Examples for several tasks rendered by the security forces for the strengthening of
security commonly are given below;
² Protecting the country from threatening situations related to war both locally
or internationally
² Acting to subdue insurrection, fights and terrorist activities
² Assisting the police to protect physical and human resources in Sri Lanka
² Providing relief services with sudden hazards and disasters
² Assisting with maintain compulsory service on the situations like sudden
strikes, etc.
² Assisting the provision of daily needs for the displaced people on various
reasons.
² Assisting the government when it is needed to perform tasks of national
value.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sing and enjoy the song given below written on behalf of the services rendered by
three forces;
rka u,la f,i foõ nUqka foda;ska msÿ fï mska ìfï
mia ms`vla .s,syS fkdhkakg rka jegla we; isõ fldfka
fk;a mqrd tl ySkfha uq¿ f,dalhd ksokd /fha
foaYfha uqr foaj;d t<s ? mqrd oe,a ù ;sfha
f,ys fydjd jevq ish mq;=ka we; wú ord jeo rK u;ska
mE úl=ï oel oE ne;ska ysi w;a uqÿka fo;s mshjreka
uõ ìfï ysñlï m;d ;u Èú msÿ l, ta mq;=ka
;=ka fyf,a yeu uõjreka ,h lsß tÍ we; Wka kñka
rka u,la f,i'''''''''
uõ l=iska fkdj ñys l=iska isß,l Wmka úre orejfka
wms Tfnka kj mK ,nd fuys h<s Wmkafkuq wo Èfka
kEishka fidhqrka Tfí wo ÿ mq;=ka yeu fï ìfï
yoj;ska wms hqoìfuys Tn ;ks lf,a ke; lsis Èfka$$$
mo rpkh (¡ l=-udrodi imq;ka;%S .dhkh(¡ iqks,a tÈßisxy
This is the English paraphrase of the above sinhala song;
There is a golden fence around this meritorious land, that was
offered like a golden flower holding in the cupped hand by the
gods, without letting even a lump of soil to get fall apart. While the
whole world asleep in one dream, the divine light of the guarding
gods of the land are burning throughout the night.
The sons who were brought up by holding at the bosom are now in
the battle field armed with weapons. Fathers, seeing the deeds of
bravery committed by them in battle fields intoxicated with moral
and belligerent, honour them by keeping the hands on their heads.
When they sacrifice their lives for the sake of motherland, breast
of every mother in three parts of the island is welled with milk in
their names.
Hail, Heroic boys! We have reborn here today by receiving a new
lease of life from you as you were born not from mother’s womb
but from the womb of the mother earth of Sri Lanka. You are never
been isolated in the battle field as all your relatives, brothers, sons
and daughters are with you in the battle fields in their hearts.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is a Tamil song which gives a similar meaning;
Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á
AøÇUQß÷Óß EßøÚ
{®©v÷¯ {®©v÷¯ & |õß
÷|]UQß÷Óß EßøÚ
(Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á)
Põ»[PÍõ÷» öußÓÀ Á¸P!
¦¯÷» Áµ÷Áshõ®!
÷©P[PÍõ÷» ©øÇ÷¯ Á¸P!
öÁÒÍ® Áµ÷Áshõ®!
ÃkPÒ ÷uõÖ® JÎ÷¯ Á¸P!
C¸÷Í Áµ÷Áshõ®!
|õkPÒ ÷uõÖ® EÓ÷Á Á¸P!
£øP÷¯ Áµ÷Áshõ®!
\©õuõÚ÷© \©õuõÚ÷©, ,
uÊÄQß÷Óß EßøÚ,
uº© ÷uÁ÷Ú uº© ÷uÁ÷Ú,
\µnøh¢÷uß EßøÚ,
(Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á)
¦zuß ÁÈ°À A÷\õPß ÷\øÁ,
¦›¢ux GuØPõP?
¦ßÚøP •P÷© ÷uÁÛß ÃöhÚ,
ö\õßÚx GuØPõP?
\zv¯ ö|Ôø¯ uõµoö¯[S®,
u¢ux GuØPõP
\©õuõÚ©õ® \©õuõÚ©õ®
uõ÷¯ EÚUPõP!
(Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á)
&PÂbº Psnuõ\ß
Activity 1.6
Prepare a booklet including the informations about one of the
institutions that establishes the social security.
For free distribution
For free distribution
1.2 Responsibilities and duties of the individuals towards the social
security
The main responsibility of establishing social security is assigned to the
individual. Accordingly, there are a number of duties must be fulfilled by the
individual to the society for the establishment of social security. There, performing
one's duties well when working with various institutions that have been established
for the establishment of social security is the responsibility of every individual.
1.2.1 Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the constitution and
other rules and regulations
Constitution is the fundamental law of the country. It is known as the supreme
law too. Except the constitutions, criminal law, civil law and other Acts and orders
are active for the establishment of social security. When they are functioning it is
compulsory to act adjusting them, respecting and obeying them.
The following is a part of a discussion occurred among a group of students
of Grade 9, regarding the duties and responsibilities of people on the constitution
and other rules and regulations.
Being bound to act
according to the constitution is a
responsibility and duty of all
Obeying to other rules and
regulations too is our obligation and
responsibility
Rizana
Consolidation and
systematization of the
administration of the country and
protection of rights occur due to
the obedience to the rules and
regulations.
Disna
Samaka
Getting a good
knowledge about the constitution
and rules and regulations is a
responsibility of citizens.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Unawareness of the law is
not a reason for excuse
It is important to know
about the punishment that is
deserved when law is violated.
There is no change in the
due punishment even though the law
is not known.
Making others
aware of the rules and regulations that
we know already is our duty.
Rukshan
Isura
1.2.2 Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the judiciary
Among the mechanisms to establish social security, judiciary is also very
important. Judiciary is the one that determines jurisdiction in a country.
Building confidence about
the court process without
distributing judicial forces
Avoiding from the
activities that disparage
the court
Respecting the judges
Responsibilities
and duties of
individuals
relevant to the
judiciary
Respecting the court
Obeying the court process
Protecting the respect of
the court
1.2.3 Responsibilities and duties of individuals related to the Police
Police renders a valuable service to ensure the social security. On behalf of
that we too, as individuals, possess a number of responsibilities and duties to be
fulfilled. Several examples for that are given below:
For free distribution
For free distribution
Protecting the discipline
on road
Showing obedience
relevant to the
practice of law
Assisting the
police to
prevent liquor, the
use of drugs and
other
anti social
activities
Assisting the
police to
capture criminals
Making the police
informed whenever
peace is violated
Not disturbing
in subduing
the sudden
illegal riots and
rallies of
the public
Protecting State
and public
properties
Assisting to
maintain peace and
protection
Assisting the police
for criminal
investigation
Provision of true
and correct
information
when necessary
Activity 1.7
Column one (I) of the following table shows a few tasks performed
by the police for the establishment of social security. Write several
duties can be fulfilled by yourself as a citizen, to make them a
success in column (II) given in the table.
Column II
Duties can be fulfilled by the citizens
Column I
Tasks performed by the police
Road safety
Elimination of drugs
Control of plagues like dengue
Environmental conservation
For free distribution
For free distribution
1.2.4 Duties and responsibilities of individuals related to the security forces
The security forces render several massive services for the social security.
Due to the fulfilment of their services, they have been subjected to the frequent
honour as the guardian deities of the land. When security forces fulfil their duties,
we too, as individuals, possess a bundle of duties and responsibilities to be fulfilled
towards the security forces.
The following diagram shows some examples for them;
Assisting the relief
services in disasters
Contribution as
much as possible for
the welfare activities
of the war - heroes
Acting sensitively
about the dead
or disabled war -
heroes
Informing security
forces about the
situations like riots
and commotions
Not disturbing
the activities of
controlling riots
Evaluating the
service performed by
the security forces
keeping life at stake
Assisting the activities
conducted by security forces
to safe guard peace and
security
1.2.5 Responsibilities and duties of people relevant to the Conciliation Board
Under this system, attempts have been taken to solve problems that occur
trivial among the public without going to the court. It is also expected to reduce the
huge accumulation of cases in the courts.
The system that exists for the conciliation in Sri Lanka has been introduced
by the Act no 72 of Conciliation Board Act of 1998.
The panel for Conciliation Board is appointed by the Conciliation Board
Commission. Educated, intelligent and virtuous individuals accepted by the society
are appointed as panel members.
There are three ways of filing a case in a Conciliation Board:
1. Through the Police
2. Through the Court
3. Filing a case privately
To make the service rendered by the Conciliation Board a success, duties
and responsibilities of individuals connected to it too must be fulfilled. They could
be lined up as follows:
For free distribution
For free distribution
Being aware of the correct process of lodging a dispute at
Conciliation Board
Responsibilities
and duties of
individuals
relevant to
Conciliation
Boards
Seeking the assistance of Conciliation Board to get
trivial disputes solved
Showing obedience towards the Conciliation Board
when disputes get solved
Protecting the respect of conciliators and other
parties
Building the conciliation through the agreement built
through Conciliation Board
Always acting with conciliators
communication without being emotional
through healthy
1.2.6 Responsibilities and duties of individuals connected to the National Child
Protection Authority
National Child Protection Authority was established by Act No 50 of 1998
of the Parliament. It has been established with the objectives of prevention of child
abuse and supplying the protection and treatments for victims who were subjected
to such abuse.
Vision
To create a friendly and protective
environment for children
Mission
To ensure that children are free
from all forms of abuse
The main services rendered by National Child Protection Authority are,
² Maintaining a direct telephone line (1929) to inform about violence against
children and child abuse
Immediate intervention if a violation of child right, relevant to the child
Right Act
² Legal intervention relevant to the child abuse
² Conducting educational exhibitions and awareness programmes
² Provision of psycho – social services to the victims
² Tsunami Foster – parent programme
² Special police investigations
National Child Protection Authority plays a massive role in providing
above services for the children. When social security is established through them, a
bundle of responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to them exists.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Assisting the activities
of National Child
Protection Authority
Taking measures
to protect child
rights
Following
all rules and
regulations
connected to
the children
Provision of
information for
the activities at
all investigations
relevant to child
abuse and
criminal
cases
Tending to
receive the
services of
National Child
Protection
Authority
Informing
about
the violation of
child rights to
National Child
Protection
Authority
Ways to help National
Child Protection
Authority
To participate in educational
exhibitions and awareness
programmes
We can extend our assistance to the contribution of the National Child
Protection Authority for the establishment of social security through fulfilling
above mentioned responsibilities and duties.
1.2.7 Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the Human Rights
Commission
For free distribution
For free distribution
Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka has been established for the
protection of human rights by No 21 Act of 1996.
This commission renders a great service for the establishment of social
security through the protection of human rights. When these tasks are performed,
we, as individuals, possess responsibilities and duties connected to the commission.
Few of them are shown below;
² Complaining about the violation of human rights.
² Showing obedience and respect for the recommendations of Human Rights
Commission
² To participate in Human Rights promotional programmes
² Assisting activities of the Commission by providing necessary and correct
information
² Fulfillment of duties connected to the human rights
Activity 1.8
Several institutions that are formed for the establishment of social
security are given in the column I in the table. State your duties
relevant to them in column II
Column I
Institutions which are active for the
social security
Column II
Duties to be fulfilled by us
1. Court
2. Security Forces
3. Conciliation Board
4. National Child Protection Authority
5. Human Rights Commission
For free distribution
For free distribution
Summary
² There is an inseparable mutual relationship between the individual
and the society
² Ensuring the social protection and co-existence at the maximum
level is social security
² Among the institutions that contribute for the establishment of social security
family, school, religious institutions and social institutions are important.
² The constitution and various rules and regulations are established for the
social security.
² Court, Police, Security forces, Conciliation Board, National Child Protection
Authority, Human Rights Commission and several other institutions are
established for the social security in Sri Lanka.
² There are obligations of citizens for the organizations that work to establish
social security.
² For ensuring of social security, fulfilment of obligations and correct
mechanisms are important.
² Correct establishment of social security at due level is important for the
national development as for the well as sustainable peace.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Contemporary
Changes
Introduction
Due to the development of science and as a result of various researches
and explorations new inventions have emerged. Accordingly, man is persuaded
to produce technical equipments in order to ease his needs. Technology is needed
to man to make his work easier. Several changes have been executed in different
fields of economy by technology. They may affect human life in an unfavorable
manner as well as in a favorable manner. Therefore, being aware of these timely
changes is a must.
By Studying this chapter that discusses about the contemporary changes,
the following competencies can be developed;
Importance of the adaptation of appropriate technology
² Technology
² New technical tools
² Ways how technology affects human life favourably and unfavourably.
² Contemporary changes occur in the economy
² To work according to such changes
² Qualifications that should be completed for new employments
² Necessity of a proper life-style with co-existance and well-being when
Job market and its trends
working with competitive world
² Co-operative Movement, its tasks and services
² Develop competencies to act as a member of the global village by protecting
localism and adhering to the contemporary changes
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.1 Changes in technology and responding to them
2.1.1 Introduction to technology
Man has been using various techniques to make his work easy. He had a
motivation for it by birth. Accordingly, the methodology man utilizes to make his
work easier can be simply introduced as Technology.
2.1.2 Changes in technology
With the down fall of feudalism, man tends to use books. It directly
influenced to develop the thinking power of man. As a result of that, science and
technology began to develop systematically. It is a pleasurable factor that the world
is gifted with new inventions in parallel to that. Technological changes means the
changes of methodologies that are used to make human need easier.
Man who lived in hunting era used stone tools to fulfill his activities. But
later they developed systematically. Life of the past man was simple. So, he used a
natural cave which was a wonderful creation of nature itself as his shelter. But with
the development occurred with new inventions and technology he had to change
systematically. As a result of that, man who lived in a cave, has made high luxury
mansions which have been built using the most latest methods at present as his
habitat.
Methodical change
took place with the
technology
A cave
A Tent
Latest upstair House
Normal house
Wattle and daub hut
With the development of technology, human needs too have become
complex. The result of it, was the endowment of more electronic equipment to the
world in place of old stone tools. This could be easily understood when we compare
the equipment that have been used in the past kitchen with the present kitchen.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Kitchen of an old house
Kitchen of a modern house
2.1.3 New Inventions through explorations and researches
With the gradual development of population, human needs also developed.
Need for efficient tools arised to get these needs fulfilled. As a result of the
industrial revolution that took place parallel to it in 18th century endowed more
new inventions to the world. It is not a secret that, explorations and researches
conducted then were a great boon to it. The study that is conducted to find some
solutions to a problem following scientific methods is a research. Exploration
and researches fulfill a specific task in present day world. Accordingly, human
needs too have been widened. Need arised for modified tools to fulfill them. It is
more apt to introduce this as the most powerful factor that influenced to the origin
of technical productions.
2.1.4 Social changes that occur with the changes of technology
According to the studies conducted from past to present it is clear that
several changes have occurred in technology. Due to these changes, more changes
have occurred in various fields of the society too. Several changes that occurred in
the society are shown below;
² Change of the consumer pattern of man
² Origin of more new employments
² Origin of new styles
² Origin of the methods of modern medical treatments
² Change in the production and usage of food and beverages
² Change in the ways of spending leisure and recreation
² Expansion of social relationships and acceleration of them
² Declining of ancient traditional methodologies
² Change of the thoughts and wishes of people
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Favourable and unfavourable effects caused the technical changes
Though the technical changes are needed, there are favourable and
unfavourable effects due to the excessive use of it in compulsory manner by man.
Favourable effects
² Works becoming easy
² Saving time
² Minimizing the wastage of resources
Increase of productivity
Increase of efficiency
² Expansion of human and social
relations
Unfavourable effects
² Human needs become complex
² Adaptation of man to unnecessary consuming pattern
² Mechanisation of people
² Society become complex
² Acceleration of environmental pollution
² Man subjecting to different diseases
² Collapse of social relations
2.1.5 Importance of utilization of technical changes as a creative citizen
Results that can be achieved by utilizing the technology for the benefits
of man are immense. The below mentioned saying makes us understand that the
utilization of technology in creative manner for different activities is apt.
The nation that doesn't build new things doesn't rise
Kumarathunga Munidasa
The above sentence shows that technology is necessary and it must be
utilized creatively. Kumarathunga Munidasa emphasizes that individual and social
development can be dawned through it.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Some instance the technology is used today are given below:
² For various domestic needs
² For multi-service necessities. (education, transportation,
communication, hygienic)
² For leisure and recreational activities
² For the building up social relations
² For the creation of new inventions
² For the acceleration of production efficiency
2.1.6 Appropriate technology
Appropriate technology is using technology to suit the social, economic,
cultural and environmental conditions of the country. Using machinery to maximize
the use of human labour in a country where human labour is in abundance can be
cited as example. There are two important things that should be focused in using
technology; advancing towards industrialization, preserving traditional industries
and expanding technical needs bearable to the country.
2.1.7 Benefits of using appropriate technology to establish sustainable
development
Sustainable development means long-lasting and endurable development.
Development that is conducted without destroying the resources that are necessary
for the needs of future generations while resources are used for the present day
activities without damaging the environment is called sustainable development. The
development process should get the maximum benefit of resources while avoiding
wastage of resources.
Given below are some benefits of using appropriate technology for sustainable
development:
² Avoiding wastage of resources
² Ability to take maximum use of labour resources
² Minimizing environmental pollution
² Ability to maintain a balanced environment
² Bearable for the economy of country
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 2.1
1. Complete the following table by identifying the technical equipment
used at your home.
Technical equipment
1 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
2 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
1 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
2 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
2. Facebook, Instergram, Linkedin are some of the social networks that
are famous today. Personal relationships are widened by these. There are
social welfare activities conducted by social media such as; educational
programmes, tree planting programmes, helping kidney patients, building
houses. There are some adverse effects of this social media too. Mention two
such instances and two ways of avoiding them.
3. State unfavourable effects that have occurred with the change of technology.
4. Suggest actions that can be used to minimize them.
5. Explain briefly the importance of new inventions when fulfilling day to day
activities.
2.2 Adaptation to the changes in economy
2.2.1 Economical changes with technology
Resources in the environment are used to fulfill the unlimited and complex
needs of man. These resources exist very limited in the environment. Man has been
persuaded to produce goods and services using these limited resources to fulfill his
needs since the ancient times. Accordingly, the three main processes that occur in
an economy of any country can be identified as:
² Production
² Distribution
² Consumption
For free distribution
For free distribution
Production means changing economical resources to fufill the needs of
human. Conversion of existing resources into goods that are compatible with human
needs using labour and techniques takes place in the process of production. The
main process that takes place there is the conversion of raw materials into finished
products.
The process of providing manufactured goods and services up to the
consumer is distribution. Transportation is a compulsory factor for it. Fulfillment of
human needs by using goods and services produced in an economy is consumption.
Above mentioned three processes are compulsory for the existence of an economy.
The changes that take place in an economy can be considered under three sections:
Changes take
place in an
economy
Agricultural sector
Industrial sector
Service sector
2.2.1.1 Contemporary changes take place in the agricultural sector
Sri Lanka is a country which has made agriculture as its livelihood since
past. There the paddy cultivation as muddy-cultivation (Mada Govithana) received
a prominent place. Chena cultivation as land cultivation (Goda Govithana) also
was popular. Apart from that the agricultural sector consists of the cultivations like
vegetables, fruits, tubers, cereals and spices too.
With the arrival of the Westerners, plantation began to be popular in Sri
Lanka. There, Tea, Rubber and Coconut occupied a special place as commercial
crops. But they existed as primary productions. With the speedy development of the
technology, a noted development could be seen in the local agricultural sector too.
At present, more modern changes has taken place in association with this could be
seen:
Examples -
² Use of machinery for preparation of land, planting, harvesting, etc
² Use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides
Introduction of hybrid seeds and tissue-culture plant varieties to get
short-term harvests
² Use of gene technology
² Utilization of new methods in irrigation
² Use of modern methods of cultivations and greenhouse cultivation
² Diversification of productions
For free distribution
For free distribution
lDIs l¾udka;fha § kùk ;dlaIKh Ndú;h
Use of modern technology in agriculture
ìï ieliSu
Preparation of land
me< isgqùu
Planting
wiajkq fk<Su
Harvesting
Use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides are used in agriculture
ridhksl fmdfydr yd m<sfndaOkdYl Ndú;h
ridhksl fmdfydr fh§u
Use of fertilizer
m<sfndaOkdYl fh§u
Use of pesticides
lDIsld¾ñl lghq;=j, § kj c, iïmdok l%u Ndú; jk wjia:d
Use of modern irrigational methods
úisß c, iïmdokh
Drip irrigation
Modern methods of cultivation
kj j.d l%u
yß;d.dr j.djla
A Green house
yhsfv%df*dakslaia
Hydrophonics
For free distribution
For free distribution
Diversification of tea productions
Instant Tea
Packed in boxes
Organic Tea
(Liquid Tea)
Green Tea
Black Tea
2.2.1.2 Changes occur in the industrial sector
Tea bags
The results of modern technical inventions have been used mostly for the
development in the field of industry. Because of this, products which were given
great efforts to produce can be produced today at a lower time with greater quality
with the use of developed machinery.
Results of them are:
² Existence of division of labour and specification
² Origin of assembling industry
² Origin of high – technical industry
² Employing robot technology in the process of production
² Use of electronic and nano technologies
² Production of machineries and accessories necessary for explorations and
researches (satellites and space crafts)
Due to this, a rapid development took place in such sectors.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Vehicle assembling industry
Transparent solar panels that can be used
as house windows
Nano scale robotics used in industry
(Enlarged image)
2.2.1.3 Changes occur in service sector
At present, the service sector occupies a special place in an economy. Services
are supplied at different levels from the production of goods up to consumption
of them. Here, services are provided with different fields like education, health,
banking, insurance, transport and trade. In the supply of such services, use of
technology and its changes have occurred immensely.
For free distribution
For free distribution
How Education is influenced by technology
Minoli - In the past, children in the village received
education from the educated elderly persons
of the village. It was called 'Guru Gedara'
Later the education was given in temples and
Pirivens. The writing on Veli Pella (Sand
Board) was commonly used. After that it was
changed into slate.
Pavithra - The formal schools in Sri Lanka were established
during the period of Europeans. The main items
used in the school were black board and chalk.
Pabasara - Now look at our school. How many facilities
are there to learn? The modern equipment
television, overhead projector,
like radio,
multimedia projector and computers have
become a massive strength to us in education.
haven't they?
Sand Board
Slate
Azfak
- Use of technology in education has become
a major part at present. we have received a
possibility of learning courses in other countries
in the world through the internet.
Over Head Projector
kalindu - Latest introduction is 'e-learning'
supuni - Not only that, more facilities have been
offered at present by various explorations and
researches in education. I feel that the rapid
development in technology is the main cause
for this.
Multi-media
Projector
For free distribution
For free distribution
Health
Health service too has been widened with modern technology. The fields
like diagnosis of diseases, treatments, production of pharmaceuticals, etc. have
experienced a rapid development. Medical equipment that can be used to perform
even very complex operations more easily have been invented. Due to the abundance
of X-ray machines, CT scanner machines, etc. which are necessary to examine the
patients, provision of services in the field of health has reached a higher level.
Scanning machines
Banking
Banking services conducts transactions
in day to day activities of man more easily.
Possibility of depositing one's money safety as
well as withdrawing them back when needed
has been provided through this. At present, the
possibility of carrying transactions, using teller
cards and without collecting money here and
there, has been dawned. By the introduction of
Automated Teller Machines, an extra safety is
provided for money. Services can be easily fulfilled, locally and internationally,
through e-banking system. As well, by using modern technical equipment, money
counting, forge currency, forge cheques and forge signatures can be identified.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Development of transportation through technology
Nikil - At the early age, people went their journeys on
foot. Later, animals were used. With the
invention of wheel, people were motivated
to use different types of vehicles. It has
developed up to the most sophisticated
vehicles at present.
Nimasha - Transportation occurs in several modes:
they occur on land, on water and in air.
Super-luxury liner ships as well as aeroplanes
can be seen.
Hansintha - Not only that. The aeroplanes with large
number of passengers on board and also with
thousands of kilos of cargo fly in the sky very
lightly. When we see how the ships are loaded
with thousands of container boxes sail on the
sea, feel amazed as well.
Harsha - At present, various modern methods are used
in cargo transportation as well as in passenger
transport.
Caravan
Modern motor car
Passenger ship
Ashen -
Is there a big service done in passenger
transport by busses, isn't it? As well as, long
flight aeroplanes, driverless vehicles and eco
friendly vehicles too are popular now.
Air craft
Dayal - Railway transport in the world is very
popular. As well as the passenger railways,
the railways that transport goods too render
a massive service. See, how marvelous the
development of technology utilized, for the
benefit of man?
For free distribution
For free distribution
Modern bus
Express train
Effect of technological development to communication
Tharindu - Do you know that in the past people ''hooted'' to
send a message to a distant person? Then the one in
the distance, understanding the messages returned
an answer by hooting
Avishka - Not only that. I have heard that people in the past
setting bonfire, sending drum-beaters, shooting the
ola-leaves on which massage is written and using
bows and arrows were also messages.
Pathum - Today we are more developed, friend! Now we can
do all of them through mobile phone
Viran - As you shout so much, tell us that who invented
telephone
Pathum - Oh…. It is simple. I have heard Alexander Graham
Bell.
Avishka - Pathum is very clever, isn't he?
Setting bonfire
Sending messages
via-birds
Tharindu - Yes, it is true, he reads a lot. By the way, do you
know that cable telephones, cable less telephones
as well as mobile phones with more facilities are
used at any amount?
Telephone developed
by Alexander
Graham Bell - 1875
Layanthma - Why? Telemail, express mails too are available
Ashan - That means, the communication has developed
even beyond our imagination. Anyone in the world
can be contact within several seconds using internet,
satellite technology, skype, viber, blogs etc.
Telephone
Use of satellite
Fax machine
Modern mobile phone
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.2.2 The influence on individual and society from the various changes occur
in the economy
We have identified that many changes have taken place in the economy
due to all the factors mentioned above. These changes create different influences
towards individual and society.
Some examples given below:
Individuals addicting to unfavorable consuming pattern
² Tending to a life pattern that does not withstand with
economy
² Getting used to wrong behavioural patterns
² Urbanization
² Environmental pollution
² Mechanization
² Occurrence of mental depressions
² Occurrence of diseases that cannot be diagnosed
Due to this, though whatever changes occur in the economy, we must be
conscious to adapt to these contemporary changes in appropriate way. There,
Identifying one's needs and use of appropriate technology accordingly
² Not becoming a slave to technology
² Apt adaptation to the changes take place in the economy
Exercise 2.2
1. Name environmental problems that have erupted with the
modern technology found in your area.
2. State your suggestions to minimize those problems.
Introduce what is "appropriate technology' and explain why it is
more important for present.
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.3 New Trends bound with Job Market
2.3.1 Identifying new trends bound with job market
All the employment opportunities available in the society are called the
world of work. The demand for the employment opportunities available in the
world of work and suitable supply for it can be simply defined as "Job Market".
Chances for employments in present day world are in abundance. But, lack of skilled
workers for these job opportunities has become an acute problem faced by many
countries in the world. Because of this, identifying job opportunities available in the
job market is important. Meanwhile, continuous awareness about the timely trends
present in the job market is a must. As well, completing the necessary qualifications
for them is also compulsory.
Many jobs have emerged in different fields of the present society. They can
be shown classified as follow;
Agriculture sector
Industrial sector
Service sector
² Electronic technicians
² Drone cameramen
² Robot technicians
² Nano technicians
² Computer technicians
Software developers
Suppliers of items for
functions
Suppliers of sound
system accessories
² Legal advisors
Interior decorations
² Recycling non bio
degradable waste
Jobs related to the
management of
bio-degradable and
non bio-degradable
waste
Food processors
² Agricultural Research
Officer
² Breeding Researcher
² Technical Officer
Recently, completion of different extra qualifications has become a
compulsory factor in the job market.
With the contemporary changes, the demand prevails in the job market for
various jobs too has changed. Factors that have influenced for it are shown below:
² Human needs being complex
² Gradual increase of the crowd receiving education
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Arrival of various machineries in the place of human labour
² Growth of labour force with the growth of population
When the attention is focused on present job market, it becomes clear that it
consists of two main sections:
² Local job market
² Foreign job market
By today, a very competitive job market has been created for both local
as well as foreign sections. Therefore, it is important, to accomplish relevant
educational and vocational qualifications from the schooling age itself.
2.3.2 Employments that are open through new trends
There are many modern employments that have emerged under the influence
of new trends in the job market. The following are some examples for them:
² Data processors
² Software engineers
² Horticulture technicians
² Genetic engineers
² Fashion modelers
² Graphic designers
² Translators
² Flower cultivators
² Architects
² Ornamental fish breeders
² Media men
² Function organizers
² Data Analysts
² Counsellors
It can be noticed that the job opportunities in the world of work has been
expanded with the advancement of technology. Being aware of this is important to
enter the job market in future.
It is important to focus on the following in completion of qualifications for job
market with new friends:
² Training on new technical equipments
² Knowledge on computer
² Willingness to be trained further
² Dedication to provide the service in additional time
² Flexibility
² Fluency in many languages (Eg - English, Tamil, Chinese, Russian,
Spanish, Korean, Japanese, French, etc.)
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 2.3
1. Find and name the new employment opportunities emerged with
the change in the technology in the field of agriculture, industrial
and service using newspapers or internet.
2. Now you are a student of Grade 9 but in future you too will have
to step into the job market. Name the employment you hope to
engage in and briefly describe the service rendered by it for both
you and country as well.
3. Prepare a booklet on "Nano Technology" which is the latest
revolution in the technology.
2.4 Acting in co-existence in competitive world while promoting
well-being
2.4.1 Well-being
“Living righteously is well-being” Or else, leading a righteous life earning
wealth in legal means without disturbing others is well-being. You might have read
the poem “Sirimath” contained in the first book of “Shiksha Marga” composed by
Munidasa Kumarathunga, who is a doyen of Sinhalese writing. Following are some
poems cited from it. Sing this all together.
isßu;a uf.
hym;a
kqjK;a
jevg;a
Woh u
uqyqKg Èh
l=, foú
f.a fÞr
m; fmd; f.k
is; fjk foh
fkdyÍ lsis
<ufhls
we;af;ls
iuf;ls
mqnq§
jeäysáhka
okajd ksis
lghq;=
leu;s h yeu
fid| foa
is;= foa
lS foa
fkdyÍ
is;=u;a
lSu;a
lereu;a
isßu;a
YslaId ud¾. - m<uqjk fmd;
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is the English paraphrase of the above Sinhala song;
Sirimath is a virtuous boy.
He is intelligent and clever.
He gets up early in the morning.
After washing his face
He worships his parents.
He sweeps the house.
When he takes books to study
does not send his attention away
on unnecessary things.
He always likes to do any work
after informing elders.
Sirimath does not hesitate to
think good things to say what he
thinks and to do what he has said.
First Book – Shiksha Margaya
Given below is the paraphrase of the above poem in Tamil Language;
]›©z Gß |s£ß
|À»öuõ¸ ]ÖÁß
AÔÄ® Eøh¯Áß
BØÓ¾® Eøh¯Áß
AvPõø»°À GÊ¢x
£Àx»UQ •P® PÊÂ
S»öu´Ázøu Án[Q
Ãmk ÷Áø»PÎ¾® EuÂkÁõß
£õh¢uøÚ¨ £i¨£uØPõ´
¦zuPzøuz vÓ¢÷u
©Úøuö¯[S® Aø»£õ¯Âhõx
¦zv ÷©÷»õ[P÷Á £izvkÁõß
‰z÷uõ›h® Gøu²®
•ßTmi÷¯ ÷Pmk
÷Áø»PÒ ö\´vh÷Á
Â¸®¤kÁõß G¨÷£õx®
|À»øu {øÚ¨£õß
{øÚzuøua ö\õÀÁõß
ö\õßÚøua ö\´Áõß
GßÖ® G[PÒ ]›©z
For free distribution
For free distribution
]Uåõ ©õºP (÷£õuÚõ ÁÈ) •u»õ® £õP®
Discuss with your teachers the righteous qualities of Sirimath mentioned in
this anthology. Think a bit, of the qualities you possess out of them as a student. Try
to promote righteous qualities and habits in you as a school student.
The following poems in Tamil Literature show how important the amicable
qualities of well-being and adhering them to your life for practice.
mOf;fhW mthntFsp ,d;dhr; nrhy; ehd;Fk;
,Of;fh ,ad;w mwk;.
mjpfhuk; - 4 Fws; - 35
zzB¾IHdj" wdYdj" fldamh" krl jpk
l:d lsÍu wdÈfhka bj;a ùu hym;a O¾uhhs'ZZ
Giving up envy, lust, anger and using filthy words is a
good virtue.
xOf;fKk; tha;ikAk; ehZk;,k; %d;Wk;
,Of;fhu; Fbg;gpwe; jhu;.
mjpfhuk; - 96 Fws; - 952
zzhym;a pß;hlska hq;= ùu" i;H l:d lsÍu"
fndrejg" jxpdjg ìh ùu jeo.;a h'
fï ksid ,Êcd ìh /lf.k Ôj;a ùu hym;s'ZZ
It is virtuous to live with good character. Be afraid of lies
and cheating while being truthful.
epiwePu ePutu; Nfz;ik gpiwkjpg;
gpd;ePu Ngijahu; el;G.
mjpfhuk; - 79 Fws; - 782
zzwOHdmkh ,enQ whf.a hy.=K mQ¾K pkaøhd fuka jefâ'
wOHdmkfhka wvq whf.a hy.=K wudjl fuka wvq ù hhs'ZZ
Virtues of educated persons grow like the full moon. The
opposite happens to those who have got less education.
^j,a¨j¾;=udf.a ;srelal=r,a .%ka:fhka Wmqgd .kakd ,È'&
For free distribution
For free distribution
Pay your affection to the following song that shows the necessity of well-being:
uf.a is; ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h
uf.a is; msú;=re h ikaiqka h ;ekam;a h
wdorh lreKdj ohd W;=rd .,k
ud isf;ys Ys,am yd .=K oyï we; /£
.=re fo.=re ys; ñ;=re yd wjg ish¨ fok
ud yefok ieá n,d isá;s wdorhlska
uf.a is; ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h'''$$
mßirh ud rlS rlsñ uu mßirh
f,dalhg nr fkdù jev msKsi uu yefoñ
jdikdjka; jQ wkd.;hla lrd
mdi,ska u. olsk fyd| u orejd uuhs'''$$$$$
mo rpkh (¡ iurùr ùrjkaks
.dhkh (¡- kd,kS rKisxy
Given below is the English paraphrase of the above song:
My mind is Sober ...
My mind is pure, calm, sober
In my mind where love, kindness and mercy over flows
Skills and virtues remain.
Parents, teachers, friends and all around me
Observe me with love how I grow
My mind is sober ............. ///
I protect the environment, environment protects me
I will grow for the benefit of the world
Without being a burden to it, I grow for work
I am the best child enlightened from the school
To get a future with success ... ///
Singing - Nalani Ranasignhe
Composed by - Samaraweera Weerawanni
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is the paraphrase of the Sinhala song in Tamil language;
GÚxÒÍ® £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx
EÚxÒÍ® ¦Ûu©õÚx Aø©v¯õÚx £USÁ©õÚx
Aß¦, P¸øn, £õ\® ö£õ[Q¨ ¤µPõ]US®
GÚxÒÍzvÀ Pø»²® uº©•® {ø»zv¸US®
B]›¯º ö£ØÓõº •øÓø¯¨ £õºzv¸¨£õº Aß¦hß
GÚxÒÍ® £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx
|õß `Çø»¨ £õxPõ¨÷£ß GøÚ¨ £õxPõ¨÷£ß
E»SUS¨ £õµ©õPõx GvºPõ»® ÷|õUQ £õh\õø»°÷» ÁÈPsh |À»
¤ÒøÍ |õß
¤ßSÔ¨¦ & AÆÁõÓõÚ £õhÀPøÍU Põø»÷ÁøÍ°À
£õh\õø»°À ö\Â©kUP ÁÈö\´¯Ä®
2.4.2 Necessity of well-being
Man has to tend towards a very complex life pattern in this competitive
world. Development took place in the fields of modern science, technology, and
communication has directly influenced it. Diversities of likes and dislikes of
individuals have caused to make it more intensified. Due to this, majority in the
society try to behave imitating blindly without understanding fertility and infertility.
This condition has become a severe social problem at present. Because of this, for
the social upliftment, there are many factors that affect the increase of necessity of
well-being. Some examples for them are given below:
² For the well-being of the society
To live as a virtuous, loyal citizen and to work
law-abiding in a society
-Diversity in personal interests
One should follow correct procedure when
fulfilling personal interests as personal interests,
likes and expectations differ
² Complexity of the life style
When life has become complex, there is a tendency for people to earn money
in wrong ways. People should earn by proper ways to lead a simple life
² Directing to earn wealth and to use wealth in just
To direct citizens to earn by hard working and by his own efforts
-Justice
Having society accepted livinghood and livelihood
² Peace
To maintain peace and harmony
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.4.3 Qualities of well-being
Qualities that should be promoted in order to create cordial and peaceful
environment in the human society can be introduced as qualities of well-being.
Since these qualities are apt to lead a righteous life they are called as qualities of
well-being.
Given below are some examples for qualities of well-being:
² Law abiding
² Listening well
² Generosity
² Gratitude
² Contentment
² Cordiality
² Righteousness
² Simplicity in life
² Courageousness
² Being away
activities
from anti-social
² Courageousness
² Being happy
² Being active
² Honesty
² Be thankful
² Kindness
² Patience
² Loving the environment
² Working to conscience
² Refrain from using liquor and
drugs
Try to promote such virtues in you since childhood. It is a great help to
make your present and future successful, good existence of the society and to make
the future of the country good.
oek Wf.k
;uhs flkl=f.
.=K kqjK
Tng i,l;s rfÜ
.;alu
j;alu
oelalu
Tlafldu
Given below is the English paraphrase of the above poem:
Eruditeness is the wealth of an individual
When your virtues and intelligence is seen,
All the people in the country,
Will treat you well
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is the paraphrase of the above poem in Tamil Language:
AÔÄ® PÀÂ÷©
J¸Á›ß Esø©¯õÚ Eøhø© & E®
Sn¨£s¦PøÍU PshÄhß
|õ÷h E®ø© ©vzx¨ ÷£õØÖ®
That is why the erudite individuals who lived in the past had expressed as
above. Hence we must be careful to serve the country fruitfully as a good citizen,
promoting the qualities of well-being by ourselves.
2.4.4 Results that occur due to acting without well-being
One will have to face severe incidents in his adult life as the qualities
of well-being have not being practiced from his childhood. As the qualities of
well-being are not practiced valuable human lives, animal lives, public properties,
natural environment and all will be subjected to the unfavorable influences. Anyone
who does not practise qualities of well-being, can be victimized to the fate expressed
in the following song:
u,a,sfh krl ñ;=rka ms<s.kag
kx.sfh fkdfydìkdlï yqre fjkag tmd
fnda.ïnr ismsß f.org tkag
i;=frl=g j;a ug jka ÿl fjkag
fokjd
o<Þ ueÿf¾ f;ajd y~ /õ
fjkjd
l< mõ u;la ù oEi u f;;a
ishla jdrhla ueß ueß
WmÈkjd
;snyg j;=r fjkqjg l÷<e,s fndkjd
,enqfõ wjjdo fkdfydìk
ÿokka ksid úh fykyqre
ux fmr .sfha jrÈka msß
tA .sh uf.a wjidkh
wdrlh
udrlh
mdrlh
fmdarlh
mo rpkh (¡ uydpd¾h iqks,a wdßhr;ak
.dhkh(¡ úYdro iqks,a tÈßisxy
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is the English paraphrase of the above song:
Younger brother! Do not welcome bad friends.
Younger sister! Do not practice unbecoming deeds.
Do not come to prison at Bogambara.!
Do not befall the sorrow occurred on me even on an enemy!
The sound of the service drum beating of the Temple of the Tooth Relic
echoes. Eyes become wet recollecting the sins I have committed. I have
born hundred times while dying and drinking tears instead of water.
Received the wrong advices. This deadly danger befell on me due to the
company of bad friends. Earlier, I stepped alone a path full of wrongs. The
end of that path occurs in gallows.
Younger sister! Do not practice unbecoming deeds.
Do not come to prison at Bogambara.!
Do not befall the sorrow occurred on me even on an enemy!
Given below is the paraphrase of the above Sinhala song in Tamil Language:
u®¤÷¯ öPmh |s£÷Úõk
u[øP÷¯ w¯ £ÇUP[PøÍ¨
÷£õP®£øµ ]øÓa\õø»US
Gv›UPõÁx GÚx Pv
÷\µõ÷u
£ÇPõ÷u
Á¢xÂhõ÷u
÷|µUThõx
÷PmQÓx
u»uõ ©õÎøP°ß ÷uÛø\
ö\´u£õÁzøu {øÚzxU Pspº Á¸QÓx
ö\zxa ö\zxa vÚ•®
usp¸US¨ £v»õP PspøµU SiUQß÷Óß
¤øÇUQß÷Óß
Ga\›UøP «Ô¯uõÀ Qøhzux
|ßöÚÔ uÁÔ¯uõÀ ÂøÍ¢u÷uõ \Û°ß ÷Pk
£õøu³k
|õß |h¢u÷uõ SØÓ[PÒ ©¼¢u
Ax GøÚ AÝ¨¤ øÁzu÷uõ yUS ©µz÷uõk
]øÓUTk
For free distribution
For free distribution
Not practicing the qualities of well-being, any person living in the society
may face to the plight mentioned below;
² Passing the life ill-fated
Isolation of the individual by
breaking down of inter-personal
relationships.
² Destruction of natural resources
Increase of expenditure, decrease of
saving
Increase wastage
² Breaking down of well-being
² Collapse social security
² Breaking down of social peace
Increase of anti social activities
Increase of mental stress
Increase of misconducts
Inclination towards bribes and
corruptions
² Happen to live with fear and
suspicion
2.4.5 How well-being influences good existence of the society
As mentioned above, if all follow qualities of well-being, it will be a great
boon for the good existence of the society. We can achieve many benefits through
it. Some examples are given below:
² Protection of others' rights
² Persuade to fulfill one's duties without delay
² Creation of peaceful environment in the
society
² Ensuring social security
² Building up with justice and freedom of
society
² Ability to expel bribery, corruptions, forgery,
theft and other anti-social activities
You too determine to contribute for the good existence of the society by
practicing qualities of well-being from your childhood. Follow the idea that ''Not
from the country to us but something from us to the country''. Then you will get an
ability to beautify the whole society, and the whole world.
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.4.6 Co-existence
Man gets his birth from the
family which is the smallest unit in
the society. We all are members of
it. When acting as a member of a
family, love and protection of others
are needed'
''Co-existence begins in the
Family''
Any individual living in the society cannot live alone. Man happens to get
support from various individuals and to assist each other. Man had been used to
live in groups since his inception. Accordingly, acting co-operatively, while living
together can be simply introduced as co-existence. An erudite concept presented on
it is shown below:
"Co-existence is a state in which two or
more groups are living together while
respecting their differences and resolving
their conflicts nonviolently"
By - Angela Nyawira
2.4.7 Necessity of co-existence
Read the following news headings well. Review these statements which
present some events of co-existence.
Whole village supported
in thatching the roof of the
house
Friends come forward to help
the friend with economic
difficulties with books and
foods happily
Many friendly countries donate
for the flood victims of Sri Lanka
14th Wesak Day celebration of the
United Nations-2017 in Sri Lanka
with the participation of many
countries
Some groups of youth come
forward to provide food and
water to the wild animals
during the drought
Youths of Sinhala, Tamil
and Muslim get together to
celebrate religious festivals
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given above are some examples for the necessity of co-existence in present society:
² To protect the unity of the diverse society
² For the fortification of social security
² To help the people those who cannot fulfill their needs
² For the promotion of the equality in the society that is unequal
2.4.8 Qualities of co-existence
Man is a social being by birth. Hence, the qualities like collectiveness and
unity received the highest acceptance in the human society, and such qualities of
well-being are given below. Try to inoculate such qualities in you too.
² Acting in collaboration
² Sharing
² Respecting others
² Cordiality
² Mutual trust
² Honesty
² Fulfill duties
Sing and enjoy the song given below related to co-existance bound with nature.
Discuss how its meaning depicts co-existance.
j;=iqÿ wr,sh .il msfmkjd
msÉp frdai u,a je,l msfmkjd
´¨ fk¨ï u,a ú,l msfmkjd
tlu jÜáhl mkai,a hkjd $$
.srd u,s;a;ka wyfi irkjd
kS, fldfnhshka mshdi,kjd $$
fmdä nÜáÉpka Wv b.sf,kjd
wyig whs;sh lshkak ljqre;a kE
j;=iqÿ wr,sh''''
mqxÑ l+ôfhda .=,la yokjd
fõfhd tl;= ù yqUia n`Èkjd $$
uy jeis jeá,d fure b.sf,kjd
fmdf<djg whs;sh lshkak ldg;a nE
j;=iqÿ wr,sh $$
mo rpkh ( iqkS;d mS' úl%uf.a
.dhkh ( bka§jÍ wdßhisxy
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is the English paraphrase of the above song:
Garden flowers and frangipani flowers blossom in trees
Jusmine and rose flowers blossom in creepers
Water lily and lotus flowers blossom in lakes
They all go to the temple in one tray
Hanging parrots travel through the air
Emerald dove fly in the sky
Small common tailorbird fly up
There are no owners to the sky
Small ants build holes
Termites build ant hill
Heavy rains fall, swarmers fly
Nobody can declare the ownership for the land
Given below is the paraphrase of the above song in Tamil Language:
|¢v¯õÁmøh²® Aµ¼²® ©µzvÀ §UQßÓÚ
©À¼øP²® ÷µõáõÄ® öPõi°À §UQßÓÚ
AÀ¼²® uõ©øµ²® }›À §UQßÓÚ
J÷µ umiÀ §øáUSa ö\ÀQßÓÚ//
QÎ²® ø©ÚõÄ® ÁõÛÀ £ÓUS®
©o¨¦ÓõÄ® ÁõÛÀ \g\›US®
]mkU S¸ÂPÐ® ÷©÷» £ÓUS®
ÁõÝUS ¯õ¸® E›ø© ÷PõµÂÀø»÷¯//
]ØöÓÖ¦® ÁøÍ Aø©US®
PøÓ¯õÝ® JßÖTi ¦ØÓø©US®
ö£¸©øÇ ö£õÈ¢x D\À £ÓUS®
©sqUS E›ø© ÷Põµ GÁ¸US •i²®//
2.4.9 Importance of inculcating co-existence qualities to life
Man cannot live alone. Individual has to deal
with family, community and society. Hence, there are
many instances that people are to work collectively when
engage in day to day activities. There are many occasions
that need co-existence qualities. Hence, several examples
are given below to show the importance of inculcating the
co-existence qualities relevant to the life when working
with others in day to day activities:
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Personal development
² Establishment of peace
² Building up mutual friendship
² Acceleration of social development
² Ensuring of social security
² Minimizing conflicts
2.4.10 How well-being and co-existence become important for the individual
and social development
Well-being and co-existence are two concepts bound to each other. There are many
well-being qualities, derived from the past through generations, practiced by us.
These qualities that are seen within us at large or minor level help for personal and
social development. According to the availability of these qualities, several groups
of people can be identified in the society. It should be noted that this categorization
is based on the most outstanding characteristics of people.
01. Those who have high well-being qualities but less co-existence qualities -
The people earn wealth by means of just or legal ways. They live without disturbing
others. They contribute less in sharing happiness or sorrow with neighbours and
friends. Participation for the weddings or funerals are also very less. They do not
harm anyone, but the contribution to the social development is very poor.
02. Those who possess high co-existence qualities but less well-being qualities -
These people earn wealth through various legal and illegal means. But, mostly lead
a friendly life with neighbours and relatives, sharing their sorrows and happinesses.
They are a burden to the society. Their means of income are not recommended by
the society.
03. Those who possess less well-being and co-existence qualities -This type of
people also can be seen among us occasionally. They earn wealth through different
illegal means and nothing is done for the social development. They do not work
co-operatively with others. You should be mindful when associating with them. You
should determine to make them virtuous if possible and not to be such a person.
04. Those who possess both well-being and co-existence qualities to the
maximum - These people earn wealth through just and legal means. They offer
to help neighbours and relatives frequently. Those, who with such well-being and
co-existence qualities are a great blessing. You should also determine to be one
such person. In this manner, by developing qualities of well being and co-exitance
in you, you can contribute to the social upliftment, fruitfully. However, it should be
For free distribution
For free distribution
noted that the categorization of people in society as ''Good'' or ''Bad'' is not suitable.
In a person who is well-known as ''bad'', there can be a little good. One should take
efforts to inculcate wholesome qualities understanding characteristics of people are
a complex. This helps personal and social development.
Activity 2.4
1. List out the virtues you have identified in you and your friends or
elders you associate.
2. Present a role play in two minutes to highlight the well-being
qualities.
3. Complete the following table with the influences that occur when
well-being is not followed.
Influence on individual
1 ..........................................................
2 ..........................................................
Influence on the society
1 ..........................................................
2 ..........................................................
4. Suggest activities that could be utilized to expand well-being qualities in the
society.
5. Explain by using examples how well-being and co-existence become important
for the social development.
2.5 Co-operative Movement
2.5.1 Introduction to co-operative movement
Sri Lankans have been
motivated to live in co-existence
since past. It is well-aware
that you might have studied
well-about well-being
co-existence in earlier lessons.
People show much willingness
to help each other in the activities
''Aththam'', Sramadana,
meritorious activities, planting
paddy, etc.
Robert Owen
The father of the
co-operative
movement
Official logo of
the co-operative
movement
For free distribution
For free distribution
Accordingly, The co-operative movement can be introduced as the
organization that was established voluntarily to get common needs and social
welfare done collectively, co-operatively and equality.
British nationalist Robert Owen is considered as the ''Father of Co-operative
Movement''. Read carefully the definition presented by him.
The Co-operative Movement is the service based on good social environment
which includes feeling of co-operation and social value in place of competition
that exists among the people for economic development.
British nationalist, Robert Owen – 1845
The following definition is the official definition about modern co-operative
movement presented by International Cooperative Alliance.
A co-operative is an autonomous association of persons united voluntary to
meet their common economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations through
a jointly owned and democratically – controlled enterprise.
(International Co-operative Alliance -ICA - 1995)
Working collectively and helping each other mutually are the main features
of co-operation. Through this, the spacial quality expected, is the collaboration
instead of competitiveness.
2.5.2 Several objectives of the co-operative movement
² Fulfilling the needs of the members
² Creating a path for man to live better
² Assisting to upgrade the living condition of people
² Fulfill the needs by the collective power that can not be fulfilled individually
The motto of the co-operative is
''Each for all – All for each''
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.5.3 The task of the present co-operative movement
The co-operative movement began first as credit societies.
The first co-operative society established in
Sri Lanka is Dumbara co-operative credit society.
It began at Theldeniya in 1906. At present, it has
developed up to a number of different types of
co-operative societies. The following are some such
co-operative societies functioning in Sri Lanka:
² Multi Purpose Co-operative Societies
² Co-operative Credit Societies
² Agro - product Co-operative Societies
Eg - Tea, Coconut, Rubber
² Fisheries Co-operative Societies
Industrial Co-operative Societies
Eg - Weaving, Carpentry,
Coir industry
² Bio Resource Co-operative Societies
Eg - Livestock farming
² Hospital Co-operative Societies
² Transport Co-operative Societies
² Housing Co-operative Societies
² School Co-operative Societies
Tasks performed by the co-operative service
² Selling consumer goods at low cost
² Supplying credit facilities
² Conducting various welfare services
² Maintaining member's savings
² Conducting
programmes
various
awareness
Eg - Self employment/small
business
² Provision of banking service
² Provision of transport services
² Purchasing of agro products
² Provision of insurance services
² Maintenance of hospital
² Provision of funeral services
² Conducting fuel filling stations
For free distribution
For free distribution
Accordingly, the co-operative movement that is dedicated to provide many
services which are necessary to fulfill various needs of life must be appreciated.
2.5.4 Multi Purpose Co-operative Societies and School Co-operative Societies
1. Multi-purpose co-operative societies
There are a large number of co-operative societies controlled by the
Co-operative Department. The institutions which have been established collecting
all together are introduced as, multi-purpose cooperative societies. Co-operative
societies that have been established to get more tasks fulfilled, instead of credit
cooperative societies are introduced by this name.
The basic objective of this is to create economic, social and cultural
development of members according to the co-operative principles. The target of
this is to inculcate feelings such as thrifty, self donation and mutual donation. To
get the membership of a co-operative society, 18 years of age must be completed.
All those who reside in the authorized region of a co-operative society, can get the
membership of the co-operative society of that particular region. Many co-operative
societies can be seen in present Sri Lanka. By December 2013, 14221 co-operative
societies had been established in Sri Lanka. Among them, 308 were multi-purpose
co-operative societies. Among them the number of co-operative societies that are
active are 304.
Services provided by the Multi Purpose Co-operative Societies
² Conducting co-operative regional outlets
to increase the services to the people
² Conducting of credit societies
² Contribution to provide funeral services
² Provision of transport and fuel services
² Conducting hospital services
² Banking services
² Self services co-operative outlets
² Milk bars/ Restaurants
² Educational services
Insurance services
² Pre-school
² Pawning
For free distribution
For free distribution
2. School co-operative societies
School co-operative societies have been established with the idea that
the cooperative must be started at the small age. These co-operative societies are
conducted by the students under the patronage of the principal and the staff. The
number of school co-operative societies that have been registered by December
2013 was 1134. Since then, 371 societies are active.
Objectives
² Fulfilling the economic, social and cultural needs and welfare needs of the
member according to the co-operative principles
² Directing to use co-operative system
² Making co-operative features and qualities popular in the school
² Generating creative leaders
² Achieving active group of citizens who work with conscious
Activities of these co-operatives are done by the students under the patronage
of the principal and the staff.
Expected Targets
² Provision of all necessary stationeries to the students at low cost
² Supply of hygiene milk and food varieties of reasonable cost
² Practicing the habit of saving from the childhood
² Supplying the educational needs
² Conducting fruitful programmes and holding competitions
² Practicing children to continue virtues and customs
2.5.5 Services that could be obtained from the school co-op society to the
students
² Ability to buy school stationery at reasonable prices
² Ability to buy food items at reasonable prices
² Ability to buy sports goods at a reasonable price
² Leadership training
² Getting used to a collective life pattern
² Provision of other needs
For free distribution
For free distribution
These school co-operative societies are well-functioning in Malaysia at
present. School co-operative society of Dharamaraja College at Kandy is also
functioning very successfully.
Source - ICA web site - www.ica.org
Activity 2.5
² Explain briefly the importance of establishing a school co-operative
society in your school
2.6 Importance of acting as a member of global village while
protecting indigenousness
2.6.1 Broad vision about the world
Man is a member of the global village. When we act as a member of the
global village, we must create a good understanding about the world. When acting
in the competitive world there must be a broad vision about it. Various changes
in the fields like economic, society, and politics of the present world take place
continuously. As a citizen, a knowledge and understanding about all those
changes must be achieved. Acting with the world with such knowledge and
understanding is known as the broad vision of the world.
Due to the continuous changes occur in the world, inheritance of new
information and more creations occur changing existing information. When acting
as a universal member, being vigilant on these changes is important. You must
assist them as much as you can. That becomes a great support to make others lives
as well as your life, good.
2.6.2 Appreciate indigenousness meaningfully
Indigenous culture
All the countries in the world possess specific cultures inherited to each
of them. That is the indigenous culture of those countries. Sri Lanka too is a
multi-cultural country since the past. As well as indigenous people, different ethnic
groups like Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims, and Burghers live in Sri Lanka. They
believe in different religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, and Catholicism.
There are identical cultures inherited to these ethnic groups. Various different
cultural features can be seen in them.
For free distribution
For free distribution
² The popular cultural features among different ethnic groups which are typical to
Sri Lanka are given below. See whether you can identify them.
Local productions
Production of goods and services within the country itself using the local
resources is local production. Such local productions which are inherited to Sri
Lanka are shown below:
For free distribution
For free distribution
Things endemic to the country
Things that are typical to a country itself are called endemic things. Many
features, which are endemic to Sri Lanka are found in the country. Indigenous
medicines, endemic plants and animals are important among them.
Indigenous medicinal herbs
Kothala Himbutu
Bambara Vel
Venivelgeta
Pus Vel
Endemic Plants
Etamba
Wild breadfruit
Maha Rathmal
Kekuna
Badulla
For free distribution
For free distribution
Endemic Animals
Neela Kobeiya
Black Monkey
Pathirana Salaya
Jungle fowl
An Katussa
Identification and learning of other cultures by moving beyond the local frame
We have learnt about the indigenous culture and main cultural features
earlier. There are many cultural features indigenous to Sri Lanka, and to other
countries as well. Though they are inherited to those countries only, we can learn
a lot from them. Hence, it is important to know about cultural features of several
countries going beyond, indigenous culture.
There are many cultural features in Japan that is an East Asian country.
Greeting with a bow, wearing Kimono, sumo game, veneration of the dead take an
important place among them. Japan is a country that has processed to a massive
development. But, Japan reached the development while protecting their culture.
Cultural features like greeting with a bow is well-popular among the elders and the
young even today.
For free distribution
Greeting with a bow
For free distribution
Kimona
Sumo game
Cultures of the African countries are totally different to this. Given below
are chief among them:
African cultural features
When we take China, that is also an Asian country, which follows many
cultural features based on dragon.
Chinese cultural features
Acting as a member of global society while appreciating the indigenousness
and protecting national identity
We have discussed about the ''Wide vision about the world'' earlier.
Accordingly, arrival of new technology, fashions, cultural features, etc occur with
the changing of the world. But we must be intelligent when we use them. We must
be careful to use the models we collect from the universal society, matching the
needs of our country. If not, we will have to face problems we never think about.
You might have heard the saying '' Siya Rata de Siri Sapade'' – Local goods
give best comforts – Our forefathers in the past produced everything they needed
by themselves. There, they were very careful not to harm animals, plants and the
environment. They gifted the needful for generation absorbing world's knowledge
while protecting ancient culture. A best example for this can be taken from our
neighbouring country, India. Since the past, Indians show a tendency to use local
productions. That example has been given to them even from the rulers of India.
The cloth worn by Mahatma Ghandhi had been prepared by himself.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Mahathma Ghandhi weaving his own cloth
We too must be nourished by such models. We must be careful to use models
received from those cultures with local modifications.
2.6.3 Identification of the way how co-existence works globally
Any person living in the world cannot
live alone. Living alone is a difficult task for
any ethnic group or a country. There are several
factors cause for this:
² Unequal distribution of resources
² Global diversity
Inability to produce all the things needed
for a country in the same country
² Rapid development of
information
technology of the world with the
technical advancement
² Conversion of the total world into a
global village
Above mentioned factors have caused
to function co-existence globally. We all, as an
individual and as a country, have to work in
accordance with. If not, we will be isolated as
a country in the presence of the world.
Norochchole power station
Obtaining foreign aids
For free distribution
For free distribution
2.6.4 Mutual inter-dependency
Between the region where we live and neighbours and at places of work
too mutual inter dependence, co-operation and co-existence can be seen. Working
inter-dependency.
co-operatively while helping each other
Co-existence among ethnic types and religions is the base of peace and development
of a country. As a country, there is a mutual inter-dependency with other countries of
the world. Due to this, various organizations have been established by the countries
of the world.
is mutual
Eg - United Nations Organizations, SARRC Organization, Union of Europe, Asian
Organization
Activity 2.6
1. Name separately cultural features, cultural heritages and attributes
of culture inherited to Sri Lanka only.
2. Name endemic plants, animals and herbs in Sri Lanka.
3. Name indigenous plants and animals that have faced the threat of
extinction as you know.
4. Present your views on “When acting with global village, indigenousness must
be protected.”
5. Selecting some countries in the world, study cultural attributes of them.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Summary
The society too is subjected to various changes with the development
of science and technology.
² New inventions that emerged through explorations and researches,
have caused for social advancement.
² Creation of technical tools are in abundance due to the increase in population
and complex human necessities.
² Technical tools should be used beneficial to the society.
² Agricultural, industrial and service sectors of the economy in a country change
continuously with modern technology.
² Many new trends in the job market associated with agriculture, industry and
service have emerged.
In the complex life pattern, the world has tended towards competitive life
pattern. Due to this, good qualities are getting detached from man.
² The problems that we have to face can be avoided by promoting well-being
and co-existence.
² The Co-operative Movement has been established with the objective of helping
each other in co-operation.
² At present, co-operative is an institute that supplies many services.
It is important to act as a citizen of global society while appreciating the
indigenousness and protecting the identity with a wide vision about the world.
² When acting globally, co-existence and mutual depending are needed.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Democratic
Governance
Introduction
Democracy is a governing system as well as a life style. Democracy can
simply be defined as a governing system based on public preference. Among the
governing systems seen in the world today, the democratic governance has been
given a prominent place.
Studying this chapter, you will be able to gain broader understanding about the
followings:
² Democracy
² Basic features of a democratic governance
² Duties bound by the rights of a citizen in a democratic society
² Tasks should be done by the political parties to establish social unity
² Elections and franchise of a democratic society
² Acting as a democratic citizen with assertiveness
² Contribution to nation building as a democratic citizen
3.1.1 Introduction to democracy
The class teacher of Grade 9 of Namalyaya Maha Vidyalaya wanted to elect
a monitor at the beginning of the new term. The teacher inquires the students a
suitable way to elect. Given below is a part of the conversation took place:
For free distribution
For free distribution
I'd like to elect Rashmika as the monitor
But, I don't like to elect him
We'd like Rashik as the monitor
We'd like to elect Januda as the monitor
Ramesh
Fathima
Children, you have proposed many names. So it is not an easy task
to elect a monitor. Well, can anybody suggest a way to take a fair
decision that can be accepted by everyone in such a situation ?
Januda
Denvi
Teacher
Teacher, let's have a vote and elect the monitor by checking the
preference. I think it is a democratic way to do this.
Chenethu
Chenethu, What a lot you know! Today we will be able to learn about
democracy. There is a topic of Democracy in our Civic Education
subject.
Devaki
Very good. Chenethu's idea is really valuable. Let's have a vote and
elect the monitor who gets the majority of votes.
Teacher
The English word ''Democracy'' is formed by two Greek words ''Demos'' and
Kratos''. ''Demos'' means public while ''kratos'' denotes power. Therefore, the
meaning of the word ''Democracy'' in Greek language is the power of people.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Scholars have given various definitions for Democracy. A few such
definitions are given below for your knowledge:
Democracy is a public governance done by the people for the people.
Abraham Lincoln
Democracy is a governing system which provides rights for everybody.
Sealer
Democracy can be introduced as a system of governance done by the people
with the decision of the majority.
Democracy is important as a governing system, as well as a life style.
Fulfilling duties while enjoying rights, respecting others' views, taking decisions
through discussions and respecting equity are some of the features of a democratic
life style. Through making such features as the vision of people, a good and peaceful
society builds up. It is important to develop such features as a member of a family
as well as a member of the school. Further, developing such features within all the
members of the society confirms the well-being of a democratic governance.
Activity 3.1
1. Collect some definitions of democracy.
2. Build up a simple definition of democracy of your own.
Basic types of democracy
The teacher in charge of Civic Education of Grade 9, Namalyaya Maha
Vidyalaya came to the class in her period. A part of the conversation took place
between the students and the teacher in the class is given below:
For free distribution
For free distribution
I have heard that something called Direct Democracy functioned in
the past.
Banuka
Yes. Yes. I have heard that Direct Democracy had functioned in the
Greek, city of Athens.
Rajeshvari
Doesn't the Direct Democracy function today ?
Siyam
In one of the books I have read, I found that today mostly Indirect
Democracy functions. In some instances we can see features of Direct
Democracy in Indirect Democracy.
Thilona
Very good children. You know a lot about the lesson that I am going
to teach you today.
Democracy
Teacher
Direct
Democracy
Indirect
Democracy
Direct democracy
The main feature of direct democracy is the direct participation of people
in governing. The governance that existed in Greek City State (known as polis)
of Athens was direct democracy. The main governing institution of Athens was
citizen council. There the public opinion was inquired directly. All the citizens had
participated in governance.
Direct involvement of people in decision making and governance is
direct democracy.
Women, slaves and foreigners were not allowed to participate in the
governance in Athens where direct democracy functioned. Only elderly male resided
in the city were given opportunity to take an active role in the direct democratic
governance.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Reasons for easy functioning of direct democracy in the past
² Limited human needs
² Limited population
² Easy to discuss, take decisions and gathering in one place
The problems of implementing direct democracy at present
Immense population
² Difficulty of gathering in one place
² Complexity of human needs
² Complex nature of present governance
Activity 3.2
1. Explain briefly the problems arising out of implementing direct
democracy at present giving examples.
2. List out some weaknesses in direct democracy in Greek State of
Athens if any.
Indirect democracy
² As it was difficult to implement direct democracy, indirect democracy began.
² Governing done by the public representatives is a feature of indirect democracy.
Public representatives are elected by the elections held time to time.
Indirect democracy can be introduced as representative democracy.
The constitution provides opportunities to inquire the public preference
directly on some factors in countries where indirect democracy functions today.
Referendum can be regarded as an example for a function of direct
democratic procedure. Holding referendum is legalized by the present Sri
Lankan constitution, in our country too.
3.1.2 Basic features of a democratic governance
The basic feature of a democratic governance is that the government is
directed by the representatives elected by the decision of the majority. There can be
many features seen where a democratic governance is practised.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Given below is a creative way of presenting the basic features of democracy done
by a group of Grade 9 students:
Basic Features of democratic governance
Sovereignty
of judiciary
Act in
accordance
with the
constitution
Freedom,
equity and
rights
Taking
decisions
majority
Government is
taken over by the
political party
which elects
the majority of
representatives
Opprtunity to
express views
freely
Existance of free
mass - media
Election of
governments
and rulers
using universal
franchise
Equal
treatment
under law
Divide the
country
into polling
divisions
Existance of
government and
opposition
Independence
of judiciary
Practice of
universal
franchise
Holding
and fair
election
Basic
features
Democratic
Government
Competitive
party system
For free distribution
For free distribution
3.1.3 Features needed to have a successful democratic governance
Students are given instructions to prepare a poster by the teacher in charge of
Civic Education, collecting information on the features needed to have a successful
democracy. Given below are the details, included in the poster, created by Devin's
group:
Factors that determine the success of democracy
² Having high political knowledge and understanding of the public
² Taking intelligent decisions when electing rulers by the public
² Having a dedicated and honest leadership
² Having a good economic condition in the country
² Having media freedom
² Existence of sovereignty of the judiciary in the country
² Clear division of functions of the government
² Existing a powerful opposition
An occasion casting votes at a polling centre
3.1.4 Some countries where indirect democracy functions
² Sri Lanka
² India
² Japan
² The United Kingdom
² France
² Switzerland
² The United States of America
² Canada
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 3.3
Some features needed to have successful democracy are given in
column I. Write briefly in column II how those features affect successful
democratic governance.
Column II
The effect on successful
democratic governance
Column I
Features needed for successful
democracy
Having high political knowledge and
understanding of the public
Dedicated and honest leadership
Acting intelligently when electing rulers
Existing a powerful opposition
Functioning the sovereignty of judiciary
(Further information about democratic governance can be learnt in the first chapter
of Grade 10 Civic Education textbook.)
3.2 The duties bound by the rights of a citizen in a democratic
society
3.2.1 Rights of a citizen
A conversation taken place among Grade 9 students about the rights of a
citizen in a democratic society is given below:
My father told me that rights are the recognition of the society for a
person to lead a good life.
Nilupuli
We all have a right to have a name and a nationality.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sadev
It's true that we have a right for a name and a nationality. I think the
right to live freely is the most important among all the others.
Not only that, what about the right to education?
We have a right to do a legal job, don't we?
It is important to have the right to follow any religion one
likes.
Supun
Nisal
Right to elect rulers in a democratic society too is an important right
of a citizen.
Janani
Fathima
You all are very good. Almost everyone knows the rights of a citizen
in a democratic society.
Teacher
One student listened to this conversation, and summarized the rights of a
citizen as follows:
² Right to live
² Right to possess a name and a nationality
² Right to obtain education
² Right to do a legal job
² Right to follow a religion that one likes
² Right to elect rulers
² Right to live in an area that one likes
² Right to vote a party that one prefers
² Right to join unions
Duties bound by rights cause for the safeguarding of rights. This would also
safeguard other's rights. Let's inquire such duties.
For free distribution
For free distribution
3.2.2 Duties to be fulfilled to the society while enjoying rights
When enjoying rights, what we have to fulfill to the society can be regarded
as duties. Each duty is bound by a right. In fact duties and rights are like two
sides of a coin. As Sri Lankans, we have been fulfilling duties from generation
to generation since past.
Fulfilling duties is a must to safeguard peace and harmony, co-existence and
social security in a democratic society.
According to that, there are many duties to be fulfiled to the society, as a
citizen, when we enjoy the rights. Some examples are given below:
² Educate well
² Obeying and respecting parents/teachers
² Caring elders
² Keeping the environment clean
² Protecting public property
² Respecting and caring religious leaders
² Being law-abiding
² Assisting the police and the security forces
² Paying taxes regularly and accurately imposed by the government
² Being honest to pay bills for the services used
² Avoiding bribery and anti social activities and help to abolish them
² Avoiding anti social activities
² Rejecting terrorism
² Protecting cultural heritage
² Not being treacherous
² Proper garbage disposal and support the steps taken by the government
² Fostering the national unity
As a student, your duty is to have a good education and be a good citizen to
the society. For that, teachers' duty is to provide you with knowledge, skills,
attitudes and competencies. Fulfilling duties by the teachers would directly
influence to safeguard your rights.
For free distribution
For free distribution
The basic duties to be fulfilled by a citizen are given in the Article No. 28 of
the constitution of 1978. Some of them are given below:
² To defend and follow the constitution and the law
² To improve the national upliftment and to foster national unity
² To work faithfully in one's chosen occupation
² To preserve and protect public property, and to combat against misuse of
public property and waste
² To respect the rights and freedom of others
² To protect nature and conserve its natural resources
3.2.3 Importance of enjoying rights within the legal frame work
Every citizen has to enjoy rights within the legal frame work. Otherwise, it
would cause to violate others' rights. If all the citizens enjoy rights within the legal
frame work, it will cause the national development.
² Although every citizen has a right to use a road, that should be done under the
rules and regulations of roadways.
² Although every citizen has a right to do a job, that job should be a legal one.
² Although there is a right to win labour rights, it should not be done against
the law of the country.
When enjoying rights some limitations are imposed with the intension of
protecting social well-being and peace. Some examples for that are media
prohibition during war conditions, rallies at times of destroying lives and public
property and prohibiting picketing can be taken as some examples. That is highly
effective towards the social well-being as well as the national development.
3.3 Let's identify the functions of a political party
3.3.1 Introducing political parties
There was a discussion about political parties between two Grade 9
students. Given below are two simple definitions of political parties presented by
two students:
For free distribution
For free distribution
A group of people
organized for the
purpose of getting
power is a political
party.
A group of people
represented to fulfil
the needs of the
country is a political
party.
Definitions of political parties given by various scholars are stated below for your
knowledge:
A political party is an
organized entity of people
with the aim of getting the
power of the country and
enacting it based on state
principles.
Maurice Duverger
A political party is a group
composed of people to serve
national requirement under
common principles.
Edmond Bark
For free distribution
For free distribution
What is meant by a political party is a group of people organized to obtain the
State power based on certain principles.
3.3.2 Different types of party systems in various countries
There are different types of party systems functioning in our country.
Political parties function in other countries too. Political parties are categorized
according to the functions of the party system of the country.
Political Parties
Single Party
System
Bi-Party
System
Multi-party
system
If only one party
functions in a country,
it has a single-party
system. The party system
functions
socialist
countries is the example.
e.g. -
² North Korea
² Cuba
two parties
actively function to get
the power of a country it
is called bi-party system.
Many other political
parties can be seen in
these
countries. But
they are not powerful to
get the power. Only two
major parties function to
win the power.
e.g. -
² The United States of
America
² The United Kingdom
If more than two
political parties function
in a country, it is called a
country with multi party
system. The main feature
of a country with a
multi-party system is that
they try to win the power
by uniting with many
parties.
e.g. -
² Sri Lanka
India
3.3.3 Duties of a political party
² Mobilising the scattered public opinion
² Promoting the aims and politics of the party
² Training future leaders
² Making the public aware
² Respecting democratic political views and opinions of the opponent parties
² Competition with the other parties to win the power of the country
² Providing social welfare services
For free distribution
For free distribution
3.3.4 The role of a political party to establish social unity
A large number of people having various kinds of views can be seen in a
country. The duty of a political party should be to direct them towards a common
goal. Thereby, a party should not work only to achieve its political goals.
The major responsibility of social development in a country is possessed
by political parties. Accordingly, some of the functions to be fulfilled by political
parties are given below:
Implementing democratic ruling meaningfully based on the national needs
disregarding religious, ethnic and geographical differences
² Creating a basis for all the ethnic groups to exist in a multicultural society
to enjoy their rights
² National development through national unity
² Following a policy to refrain from religious and ethnic conflicts
² Dedicate to establish sustainable peace and for living with peace,
co-existance, co-operativity and national unity
3.4 Franchise and elections
3.4.1 Franchise
Franchise is the preference.
Further, expressing one's opinion
at an election to elect rulers or
representatives is franchise. Among
the rights of a citizen in a democratic
country, franchise is given a prominent
place. The right to elect people's representatives at an election is regarded as
franchise.
The right to express one's opinion
at an election to elect people's
representatives and to check public
opinion is franchise.
In our country, the citizens who complete 18 years of age are entitled legally
for the franchise. It is necessary to include the name properly in the electoral list.
Given below are some of the reasons for disqualification to be an elector according
to the constitution of 1978:
For free distribution
For free distribution
If he is not a citizen of Sri Lanka
If he is under any law in Sri Lanka found to be of unsound mind
If he is disqualified with civic rights
If he is given a life imprisonment
If he is sentenced to death
If he is a named bankrupt by law
3.4.2 Elections
In a democratic governance, representatives are elected by the citizens
casting their votes. Elections are held to elect people's representatives and to check
the public opinion on important matters of the country.
Expressing one's vote is exercised in different situations. Through that,
electing representatives for government institutions in a democratic society is done.
Not only that to obtaining the public opinion in relation to important events of
the country, to react to that, vote is used. Accordingly, election is the method of
checking public opinion of democratic countries.
Elections functioning in Sri Lanka at present:
² Presidential election
² Parliament election
² Provincial Council election
² Election of Local Government Institutions
3.4.3 Universal franchise
Franchise is granted to all qualified citizens to express their right to vote
in elections without discrimination. Teacher of Civic Education inquired about
the limited franchise that functioned, before getting the universal franchise in our
country.
I learnt in History that we gained limited franchise under the
constitutional reforms in 1910. Franchise was given only to the males
who were above 21 years, educated and rich.
Damith
That constitutional reform is introduced as Crew Mc Cullum reforms.
Amjad
For free distribution
For free distribution
A significant feature of the Crew Mc Cullum reforms is the electing
of representatives by voting to the Legislative Council for the first
time.
Bhagya
Among the unofficial representatives, four had been elected at the
limited election.
Vihanga
At the limited election, two for the Europeans, one for the Burghers
and one for the educated Sri Lankans had been elected.
Devaki
The first Member of the Parliament elected was Sir Ponnambalam
Ramanadan on behalf of the educated Sri Lankans.
Vihanga
Well. You have learnt a lot about the limited franchise. Now I'll
explain you how we got the universal franchise.
Teacher
Universal franchise was given to the Sri Lankan citizens, both males
and females, who were above 21 years of age by the Donoughmore
Constitutional Reforms in 1931. Hence the Universal Franchise provided
basis for the welfare of the citizens. The age limit for the universal
franchise has been reduced from 21 to 18 years in 1958.
Qualifications required to grant franchise
² Being a citizen of Sri Lanka
² Completion of 18 years of age
² Citizen's name should be included in the electoral list
² Being a person not subjected to disfranchise
Factors to be considered when casting the vote
² Electing educated, intelligent and exemplary leaders as representatives
² Being alert of policy papers produced before the elections
² Electing leaders who take care of public expectations instead of having
personal expectations
² Electing leaders who are dedicated to implement national goals and principles
For free distribution
For free distribution
Importance of universal franchise
² Getting opportunity to all the citizens who are qualified to cast vote for one's
political opinion, without any discrepancy
² Getting opportunity to elect suitable leaders
² Getting opportunity to all citizens to engage in active politics
² Being able to expand political knowledge of the people
² Developing the sense of citizens that they are stake holders of governance
² Getting opportunity to elect rulers whom they like and reject rulers they
dislike
3.4.4 Rights of the public related to elections
Election is an opportunity where people participate in governance. Let us
simply discuss only two strategies of electing representatives at elections. They are
introduced as representative systems.
² Simple Majority Representative system
² Proportional Representative system
There was a discussion about the representative methods among the
students in the class. Later, they displayed two definitions of their own in front of
the class.
Simple Majority Representative
System is electing the candidate who
won the majority of votes among the
others of the electoral district.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Proportional Representative system
is the comparative distribution of
members according to the number of
votes gained by a party or a group at
an election.
Great Britain is an example for a country that holds elections using Simple
Majority Representation system. Even in our country the same system functioned
from 1931 - 1978.
Members for the parliament, provincial councils and Local Government
Institutions are elected based on Proportional Representative System.
The teacher in-charge of Civic Education inquired about the rights and
duties of citizens at an election. Based on a group discussion Devni's group came
up to present a leaflet.
Rights of citizens related to election
Inclusion of one's name in the electoral
² Right to vote
² Getting the membership of a political
party as one wishes
² Establishment of political parties
² Organising political meetings, taking
part in them and expressing opinions
² Contesting as a candidate in elections
² Engaging
activities
in political propaganda
² Criticizing the government based on
fair reasons
Duties of citizens related to election
² Casting the vote
² Following the rules and regulations of
elections
² Avoidance of violence
² Acceptance of victory and defeat in
equanimity
² Helping to implement election rules
² Canvassing without violating others'
rights.
² Expressing
ideas without damaging
others' dignity
² Respecting others' rights while enjoying
victory and defeat
² Working without harming the law and
order of the country and not supporting
such activities
For free distribution
For free distribution
3.5 Assertiveness
3.5.1 Introduction to Assertiveness
Assertiveness means working on just, reasonable and firm principles
according to one's own self-conscience. Assertiveness is a quality that should be
developed right from the beginning as a student. It is very important to work with
assertion to succeed your future life.
3.5.2 Qualities necessary to develop assertiveness within a person
Appreciation
of justice
Exemplary
characteristics
Not being
aggressive
Expressing
personal
opinion directly
Work with
broad
understanding
Respecting
others' views
Honesty
Fairness
Benevolence
Loyalty
Softness
Firmness
Self assertiveness
Assertiveness with others
In the presence of any challenge
being without changing one's
proper and fair actions
² To do everything according to
one's self-assertiveness
² Even at challenging situations
not to involve in any unfair
deals even under influence
² To work on firm principle
optimistic
critically
attitudes
² When working with others, to work with
one's own principles, self-conscience,
rules and regulations and social norms
² Expressing one's own feelings when and
where necessary
² Acting critically with positive attitudes
and firm principles
² Responding firmly on correct
things
without having any personal benefits
² Need to be optimistic, firm and constructive
when building up assertiveness with others
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 3.4
Some of the qualities necessary to develop assertiveness within a
person are given in Column I. State how these qualities influence
personal development in column II.
Column I
Column II
Qualities necessary to develop
assertiveness
How it influences personal
development
Honesty
Appreciating Justice
Exemplary characteristics
Benevolence
3.6 Nation Building
3.6.1 Introduction to the concept ''Nation Building''
Nation Building is working together with different ethnic groups, religious
groups or social groups as one nation to achieve development goals facing future
challenges. It is essential to disregard differences of ethnic, religious, parties, caste
or creed in nation building.
For an example, in our country people belong to Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim,
Burgher live together. Further, they belong to different religious groups such as
Buddhists, Hindus, Islamics, Catholics and Christians. Everybody must dedicate
for nation building with a sense of Sri Lankans.
Need of a national policy for nation building
3.6.2 Introduction to national policy
A long term action plan prepared in order to achieve the identified national
development needs, is called as a national policy. It should exclude political party
differences. The main focus should be the development of the country. Further the
national policies should be for the betterment of the country, not for the personal
needs or personal expectations of the rulers. Whatever the government comes to
power, the national policy should continuously exist further.
For free distribution
For free distribution
National policy for education, national policy for economic development
and national policy for proper garbage disposal can be given as some examples.
3.6.3 Need of a national policy
Having a national policy is essential to fulfil the development needs of a
country. It helps to achieve public expectations as well as to reach the specific
objectives.
Some of the benefits gained by having a national policy are given below:
² Economic and social development of the country
² Achieving specific objectives and goals
² Fulfill public expectations
² Help to achieve future challenges
² National unity occurs
² Creating sustainable national peace
² Creating sustainable development
3.6.4 Contribution to national policy making
Contribution to national policy making is a duty and a responsibility of
everybody. It is important to provide active contribution as well as to do so without
having personal benefits. Given below are some ideas of Grade 9 students, regarding
the ways of contribution to nation building as a citizen:
² Assisting to identify national needs
² Making aware of the relevant sectors regarding identified regional needs
² Making suggestions and procedures for national policy making
² Contributing to national policy making
² Taking part in national policy making without having personal benefits
² Working according to the national policies
For free distribution
For free distribution
3.6.5 Working according to the national policy
It is important to work according to the national policy as well as to
contribute actively in policy making.
Given below are some examples:
² Appreciating national policies that focus on public well-being
² Active contribution to implement accepted national policies
² Contribution to national development by working according to the national
policies
3.6.6 Importance of dedicated contribution for nation building
It is very important to provide dedicated contribution for nation building.
Some examples for that are given below:
² Everyone's contribution towards nation building with a sense of patriotism
² Mental and physical commitment of all the citizens to their job/ profession
to build the country
² Whatever a citizen does, should be done aiming at the national development
Dear children, you may involve in different activities such as cleaning
the classroom, cleaning the school premises, growing plants, proper garbage
disposal, etc. in the school. Although they all seem to be minor activities, they
play a major role in nation building. When small children get together, we can do
a great contribution to nation building as creating a big river by collecting small
rain drops.
3.6.7 Procedure to be followed for nation building as a citizen
Think about the steps to be followed for nation building. As a citizen we can
do an immense service for the country to stand as one nation. Some procedures to
be followed for that, examples are given below:
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Fulfilling personal duties well
² Paying attention to what a person can do to the society rather than what
the society can do to a person
² Need of dedication towards national unity and peace as a citizen
² Maintaining an affordable lifestyle
² Protecting public property
² Conserving environment
² Working for personal development while contributing to national
development
² Providing maximum contribution to national development
² Working without expecting any personal benefits
² Performing one's duty honestly and committedly
² Not engaging in activities that are threats or influences for national
security
² Providing one's service to the national development by getting good
knowledge and labour
² Refrain from mal-activities like theft, corruption bribery, etc.
Activity 3.5
List the ways that you can contribute for nation building as a school
student.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Summary
² Democracy is a governing system as well as a life style.
Enjoying rights of a citizen in a democratic society should be done
within a legal frame work.
Franchise and elections are very important rights of a citizen in a
democratic society.
² People get opportunity to participate in governance through indirect
representation in elections.
² Franchise granted to all qualified citizens without discrimination is called
universal franchise.
² Working on just and reasonable principles with self-confidence is called
assertiveness.
² Having assertiveness with one self and working assertively with others highly
enhance social development.
² For Nation Building, it is highly necessary for all the citizens to dedicate
without any discrimination.
² There are a large number of qualities necessary to develop assertion within a
person.
² Self assertion and assertion with others cause social development.
² Working together as one nation to achieve development goals facing future
challenges of different ethnic groups, religious groups and societies is
important.
It is very important to work based on fruitful national policies for nation
building.
It is very important to fulfil duties as a citizen to nation building.
² One should work devotedly as a Sri Lankan, to build up national unity and
sustainable peace.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Local
Government
Institutions
Introduction
In the continuity of our daily requirements, different types of services
are needed to be utilized. Some of these services are very closely connected to
our lives. As such, they have become essential services. Out of such essential
services, health and sanitation, waste disposal, disease control, safety, secure
places to spend leisure peacefully and clean and safe roadways occupy important
positions. Therefore, the need has arisen for a public institution to mediate with
the supply of these essential services to the public.
To fulfil such regional requirements more fruitfully and efficiently,
special institutions established in Sri Lanka are introduced as Local Government
Institutions. They function under three categories now as Municipal Councils,
Urban Councils and Pradeshiya Sabhas.
The aim of this chapter is to look into the functions of these Local
Government Institutions broadly.
By studying this chapter you get the opportunity to study the followings:
² Local Government Institutions and their structure
² Need for Local Government Institutions and their services provided to the
community
² Duties to be fulfilled by the public for the maintenance of such services
effectively
² Duties to be fulfilled with regard to the services to be provided by the
public representatives and the government officers attached to the Local
Government Institutions
² You will be able to analyse the contribution of the Local Government
Institutions for the national development through regional development.
For free distribution
For free distribution
4.1 Local Government Institutions
4.1.1 Identification of Local Government Institutions
It was a holiday. Achini’s father was reading the daily newspaper. Achini
came to him with a cup of tea. She looked at the paper her father was reading. A
part of their conversation is as follows:
Achini
- “Father, today’s paper carries a lot of information about Local
Government Institutions, doesn’t it?”
Father
- “Ah, yes, daughter. Both these pages describe Local Government
Institutions.”
Achini
- “Father, what are these Local Government Institutions?”
Father
- These institutions have been set up to ease the administration of the
region, and to fullfil the needs of the region.
Achini
- That means these institutions have been set up for our own ease,
haven't they?
Father
''Yes, Daughter, take your time and read this article leisurely. You will
get to know a lot about Local Government Institutions.”
Having read the article published in the newspaper, Achini had summarized
some important points as given below:
² Local Government Institutions function under the guidance of the Central Government.
² Local Government Institutions in Sri Lanka function as Municipal Councils, Urban
Councils and Provincial Councils.
² The Central Government has assigned the administrative affairs to the Local
Government Institutions through various Acts.
² The 13th amendment to the 1978 constitution empowers the Provincial Council to
supervise the administration of the Local Government Institutions.
² The structure of a Local Government Institution consists of the members elected by
the public vote and of the government officers.
² Local Government Institutions are bound to follow the instructions issued by the
Central Government as well as the Provincial Council.
² Under the democratic ruling system, Local Government Institution contribute to
maintain the administrative affairs of the Central Government more easily and to
operate welfare services more closely to the public.
² Local Government Institutions provide an immense service to regional development.
For free distribution
For free distribution
It can be simply defined that the special institutions which are operative
to maintain community services, easily and efficiently, in the urban
semi - urban and rural levels are called Local Government Institutions.
Activity 4.1
1. Construct a simple definition to introduce Local Government
Institutions.
2. Name the Local Government Institution which belongs to your
living area/ your school.
4.1.2 Necessity of the Local Government Institutions
The main purpose of a Local Government Institutions is to maintain public
services efficiently and fruitfully. Study the chart given below to identify the
necessity of the Local Government Institutions:
Expansion of democratic
ruling up to the regional
level
Acting suitably to
match the regional
requirements
Easy maintenance of
community services
methodically
Accelerating national
development through
regional development
Easy preparation of
national policies based on
regional policies
NECESSITY
OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTIONS
Easy administration of
regional administrative
affairs through
decentralizing Central
Government's affairs
Expansion of youth
participation in political
leadership
Ability to build up future
political leaders through
regional level
Ability to act quickly in
emergency situations
For free distribution
For free distribution
4.1.3 Historical evolution of Local Government
Inception of the present Local Government Institutions of Sri Lanka
commenced during the British ruling system. History bears evidence that the
concept of regional administration existed in Sri Lanka, long ago.
With the introduction of a plantation economy by the British, they needed to
develop infrastructure (eg: roads, exchange of messages). Increase in the population,
urbanization and the increase in the provision of social benefits to the public, were
the other reasons contributed towards to form formal Local Government Institutions
during British period.
As such, the regulations brought in by the British, affect the birth of Local
Government Institutions and their gradual development.
Some regulations brought in by the British are as follows:
² Establishment of Municipal Councils in 1865 A.D. in Colombo, Kandy and
Galle under the Municipal Council Ordinance No. 17
² Establishment of Village Councils in 1871 A.D. under the Village Council
Ordinance No. 26
² Establishment of Town Councils in 1940 A.D. under the Town Council
Ordinance No. 61
² Establishment of Urban Councils in 1946 AD under the Ordinance No. 03
The first Municipal Councils in Sri Lanka
Municipal Council in
Colombo
Municipal Council
in Galle
Municipal Council in
Kandy
For free distribution
For free distribution
After the independence, the following Local Government Institutions were
functioned in Sri Lanka;
1. Village Councils
2. Rural Councils
3. Urban Councils
4. Municipal Councils
In the year 1980, By the regulation No. 35:
abolished Village and Rural Councils and established District Development
Councils and,
established village based councils and divisional based councils to promote
more participation in District Development Councils.
Regulation No. 15 of 1987 abolished the District Development Councils
and established Provincial Councils.
Accordingly, after 1987, in Sri Lanka,
² Pradeshiya Sabhas
² Urban Councils and
² Municipal Councils are under operation.
Activity 4.2
Prepare an article for a wall newspaper on, “Changes that took place in
the local administration of Sri Lanka after independence.”
For free distribution
For free distribution
Local Government Institutions function in Sri Lanka as at 01.05.2017
Province
District
Municipal
Councils
Urban
Councils
Pradeshiya
Sabha
Total
Colombo
Gampaha
Kalutara
Kandy
Matale
Nuwara Eliya
Galle
Matara
Hambantota
Jaffna
Mannar
Vavuniya
Mulativu
Kilinochchi
Batticaloa
Ampara
Trincomalee
Kurunegala
Puttalam
Anuradhapura
Polonnaruwa
Badulla
Moneragala
Ratnapura
Kegalle
Western
Central
Southern
Northern
Eastern
Wayamba
North Central
Sabaragamuwa
Total
For free distribution
For free distribution
4.1.4 Structure of Local Government Institutions
Local Government Institutions are inclusive of both the representatives of
the public and the government officials. A board of officers, including government
officials, has been formed to fulfil the affairs of such institutes efficiently and
fruitfully. Some basic features of the structure of a Local Government Institution
are as follows:
² The person in-charge of the Local Government Institution is a representative of
the public.
² Conducting administrative affairs is done by the government officers
² Decisions regarding the Local Government Institution are taken by the public
representatives.
Heads of Local Government Institutions
Institution
Designation
Municipal Council
Urban Council/
Pradeshiya Sabha
Chief
Assistant
Administrative officer Municipal Commissioner Secretary
Mayor
Deputy Mayor
President
Vice President
Structure of the representatives of the public and the government officers in
different Local Government Institutions are as follows:
Structure of a Pradeshiya Sabha
Chairman (Public Representative)
Vice Chairman (Public representative)
Representatives of the
Public
(Public Representation)
Government officials
Secretary
Other officials
Eg: Technical officers
Management Assistants
Drivers/minor staff/labourers
For free distribution
For free distribution
Structure of a Urban Council
Chairman (Representative of the Public)
Vice chairman (Representative of the Public)
Representatives of the Public
(Members of Urban Councils)
Government officials
Secretary
Other officials
Technical Officers
Management Assistants
Drivers/Minor staff/Labourers
This basic structure can vary based on different urban councils.
Structure of a Municipal Council
Mayor
Representative of the Public
Deputy Mayor
Representative of the public
Representative of the
public
(Members of Urban
Council)
Government officers
Municipal Commissioner
Other officials
Eg: Technical Officers
Management Assistants
Drivers/Minor staff/Labourers
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 4.3
1. Draw the structure of the Local Government Institution which your
school/home belongs to.
2. Compare the structure of the Local Government Institution of your
area you drew, with the structure given in the textbook.
Responsibilities of the Head of a Local Government Institution:
1. To convene and postpone the council
2. To preside over the council
3. To take the initiative to provide the needs of the people
4. To organize and conduct activities related to the Local Government Institution
² An officer of Sri Lanka Administrative Service is appointed by the Governor
of the relevant Provincial Council as the Municipal Commissioner in a
Municipal Council.
² An officer of the Super Grade, in the State Management Service is appointed,
as the Secretary to the Urban Council/ Pradesheeya Sabha, by the Public
Services Commission.
When the term of a council ends, the respective Municipal Commissioner or
the Secretary carries on with the conduct of the responsibilities of the council
until the next election. Otherwise, administrative authorities are entrusted to
a special officer.
Local Government Institutions are given various powers to carry out their
responsibilities. Given below are a few examples of them:
Imposing Assessment Taxes and other related taxes
Issuing street markings certificates
² Approving building plans
² Permitting the construction of permanent buildings and other structures
² Dismantling unauthorized structures
² Constructing public roads, canals, public markets, dispensaries,
Initiating activities to preserve the environment
libraries, gardens and maintaining them
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Carrying out necessary action to eradicate infectious diseases
² Removing unauthorized slums, huts and other structures harmful to
health
² Maintaining ownership of natural streams and reservoirs
Proper execution of the above mentioned powers ensure the public welfare
and the development of the area. Finances that are required to be spent for the multi
services launched by the Local Government Institutions are earned in various ways.
Ways of earning Financial Resources by the Local Government Institutions
² Assessment taxes/Tax finance
² Grants from the Minister of Local Government to the Local Government
Institutions
² Money earned through Leasing/Renting out of properties attached to the
Local Government Institutions. (Eg - Town halls, boutiques, shops, etc.)
² Revenue collected from the supply of public services
² Allocations from fines imposed by magistrate’s courts over violating laws
² Donations and Aids from foreign governments and Non-Governmental
Organizations, with the approval of the Parliament of Sri Lanka
Electing representatives for Local Government Institutions
² So far, representatives were elected by the votes of the relevant region on
proportional representation. Amendments to the election of Local Government
Institute Ordinance No. 22 of 2012 has now been approved. Accordingly,
procedure for the representation of Local Government Institutions at an
election is scheduled to be changed.
In accordance with that, it is suggested that the representatives will be elected
on individual representation and proportional representation, based on the
electorate level.
Delimitation of Local Government Institutions
Limitations to the Local Government Institutions are decided by a National
Committee on Limitations. Accordingly, criteria that are taken into consideration at
the limitations of Local Government Institutions are listed below:
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Population ratio to suit different nationalities
² The geography and physical features
² Population and the Density of the population
² Level of economic development
According to the limitations decided on Local Government Authority areas, map of
the Colombo District Local Government Authority area is shown below;
Activity 4.4
1. Having discussed with the teacher, present a short report of details,
on the procedure of the election of representatives to the Local
Government Institutions.
2. Is proportional representation the more suitable approach to select
members to Local Government Institutions?
Is a combination of a member for each division and proportional
representation better? Arrange for a debate. Be guided by your
teacher.
For free distribution
For free distribution
4.2 Services offered by the Local Government Institutions
Under the subject Civic Education, students of Grade 9 were expected to
learn that day about ''The services offered by the Local Government Institutions.''
Having accepted the invitation given by the Class Teacher, an officer in the
Pradesheeya Sabha, Mr. Anil had come to the class on time to discuss details of the
topic.
A part of the discussion Mr. Anil had, with the students in the classroom, on
the services fulfilled by the Local Government Institution is given below:
Mr Anil:
reading
Local Government Institutions
offer many services
residents of the areas and specially
for students. Maintaining public
libraries and
rooms,
children’s parks, passageways
for walking and jogging, etc. can
be taken as examples.
Local Government Institutions
also conduct pre-school services.
They also contribute to launch
religious and cultural programmes
with a common value.
Library service
Reading hall
For free distribution
For free distribution
Children's park
Passage ways for walking
Fathima:
(student)
Mr Anil:
Sandareka:
(student)
Mr Anil:
Amila:
(student)
Mr Anil:
A pre - school
Are the roads too repaired by the Local Government Institutions?
Services such as road repairs,
construction of bridges
culverts and construction of new
roads that belong to the Local
Government authority areas are
fulfilled by them. Street lighting
is also attended by the Local
Government Institutions.
Regional road maintenance
What are the other services provided by the Local Government
Institutions?
Providing health and sanitation is
a major responsibility of a Local
Government
Institution. Under
this topic the institution attends
the maintenance of proper
drainage and sewage services,
maintenance of drains and canals,
maintenance of public toilets, etc.
They are all valuable services.
Isn’t the waste disposal a service
carried out by Local Government
Institutions?
Yes. Management of waste is a
very important service carried out
by Local Government Institutions.
They attend to proper disposal of
waste and operation of projects for
recycling.
Sewage Services
Collecting garbage for
re - cycling
For free distribution
For free distribution
Ravi:
Don’t the Local Government Institutions check the sale of
unhygienic food?
Mr Anil:
Why not? Oh yes. Thank you very much for reminding that. Not
only the sale of unhygienic food, the Local Government Institutions
also act against advertising of such food. There are many more
services offered by the Local Government Institutions.
Maintenance of public cemetery, maintenance of public bathing
wells and crematoriums, the supply of water based on the regional
needs, are some other responsibilities of the Local Government
Institutions. Services provided as fire extinguishing are also fulfilled
by the Local Government Institutions.
Malithi:
Mr Anil:
Public well
Fire extinguishing service
There was a clinic organized in our village by the Pradesheeya
Sabha.
Yes, eye clinics, clinics
infants and pregnant mothers,
programmes to control the spread
of infections diseases like dengue
and clinics for the control of
non-communicable diseases are
some other programmes provided
the Local Government
Institutions. They also maintain
ayurvedic
dispensaries. Not
that but social security
programmes for the elders are
also conducted.
Programme to
eradicate dengue
For free distribution
For free distribution
Clinics for pregnant mothers
A rural medical clinic
Achini:
(student)
Mr Anil:
Are there any other programmes for the development of the area by
the Local Government Institutions?
Local Government Institutions attend to the development of water
supply and small irrigation canals towards economic development.
Not only that, programmes are also conducted to preserve the
environment by the Local Government Institutions.
The monitor of the class, Asitha thanked Mr. Anil for the explanation of the
services given regarding the Local Government Institutions so well. His speech
went like this:
We did not know the Local Government Institutions do such a big service. You
explained the services from the Local Government Institutions so well. Local
Government Institutions contribute an immense service to maintain cleanliness of
the environment and to ease our day - to - day activities on various occasions from
our birth to death. It is now clear to us that all those working in Local Government
Institutions provide a lot of services to us and the country. We are very happy
about it. We wish to offer our gratitude and honour to you for holding such a
friendly discussion and making us knowledgeable on the subject.
Activities 4.5
1. Discuss with your teacher how the following services extended
by the Local Government Institutions in your area contribute to the
development of human resources.
² Maintenance of libraries and reading rooms
² Maintenance of playgrounds
² Conducting of medical clinics
2. Propose a series of programmes to your Local Government Institution that
can be done towards prevention and control of dengue.
For free distribution
For free distribution
4.3 Duties of the public towards the services given by the Local
Government Institutions
The public has the right to get the maximum use of the services provided
by the Local Government Institutions and to enhance their living conditions. As
well, it is the duty of the recipients of such services to fulfil their duties in return
effectively for those services.
Given below are a few examples of duties the public (recipients) has to attend
² Payment of due taxes without delay
² Prompt payment of bills for the services provided
² Adhering to the instructions given by the Local Government Institutions
regarding the management of waste and other disposables in a suitable manner
² Maintaining a clean environment and contributing towards environmental
preservation
² Safeguarding public property and economical use of such property
² Obtaining legal approval for constructions
² Working co-operatively with the public representatives and officers attached to
the Local Government Institutions
² Make the public representatives and the officers aware of the regional needs
Informing breakdowns of services and maintenance work on emergency
situations
4.4 Responsibilities and duties of public representatives and
government officers towards services offered by the Local
Government Institutions
This chapter made you aware of the services supplied by Local Government
Institutions towards welfare of the public. Both public representatives and
government officers attached to the Local Government Institutions need to attend
to their responsibilities and duties in a responsible manner. Such an attitude is
essential towards an efficient service.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Responsibilities and duties of the representatives of the public and the government
officials
Responsibilities
duties
Identifying resources in the area
² Understanding
the needs and
the public
² Paying attention to the grievances of
problems of the public
Identifying
development
strategic
² Maintaining close relationship with
plans
the public
² Attending meetings/ Taking part in
² Assisting with the preparation of plans
² Considering requirements in making
decisions
meeting
² Preventing
corruption
forgery, bribery and
² Looking into programmes being acted on
² Acting on rules and regulations given
² Providing leadership
² Taking action against forgery, corruption
² Commitment towards the betterment
of the public
² Being honest
² Making the institution an attractive
and bribery
² Preventing misuse of public property and
government services
place for the public
² Fulfilling the public needs effectively
² Avoiding the misuse of state property
² Supervising development activities as
and government services
required
² Providing a service of high standard
² Fulfilling the responsibilities entrusted,
properly
Activity 4.6
Given below, in column 1 in the table, are some duties a people’s
representative/government official has to attend to. Fill column 11
with the procedure to follow in fulfilling of duties.
Column 11
Procedures that should be followed
in fulfilling daily services/ duties
Column 1
Duties of public representatives and
government officials
Maintain close relationship with the
public
Fulfilling of public needs efficiently
Avoid misuse of government property
Commitment to serve for the welfare of
the public
For free distribution
For free distribution
4.5 Contribution of the Local Government Institutions towards
the national development
The utmost result of a regional development process is the social, economic
and cultural development of a country which takes place as the overall development.
Maintaining a balance with the environment is essential in the implementation of
all development activities. Regional development is directly associated with Local
Government Institutions. A few examples regarding contributions from regional
development towards national development are listed below;
i. Identifying regional needs and the resources
ii. Preparation of regional development plans through identifying the
regional needs and the resources
iii. Implementing plans properly
iv. Producing regional leaders
A short description about each topic is given below:
i. Identifying regional needs and the resources
The needs of people that differ according to the place they live in are called
regional needs. The following contribute to vary the requirements of regions:
² Distribution of resources
² Variety in culture
² Geographical background
Therefore, it is a strong responsibility of a Local Government Institution to
identify the requirements for each region. A few examples related to regional needs
are given below:
² Providing drinking water to those living in a dry zone region
² Proper waste disposal and management in the Urban areas
² Development of infrastructure in rural areas
² Providing recreational facilities to both urban and rural areas (library services,
playgrounds, roadways for walking, children’s playgrounds, etc.)
² Providing houses to low income groups
² Street lighting
² Maintaining pre-schools to develop little children
² Taking steps to control the spread of dengue in affected areas.
For free distribution
For free distribution
ii. Preparation of regional development plans identifying the
regional needs and the resources
Water supply
Procedure to be followed in preparing plans to
supply water to drought-stricken areas
Examples:
Identify suitable catchment areas for the supply of
water to areas with a shortage of drinking water
Investigate the possibility to supply water from
the national water supply
² Prepare action plans to find the necessary finances
for the water supply scheme
² Get technical assistance
Garbage disposal
² Supply containers and give
instructions to prepare compost
manure with household leftovers
² Arrange to sort out garbage
before disposal
² Supply waste bins
² Collect garbage
² Arrange recycling programmes
for garbage
² Prepare plans for the production
of organic manure
² Make the public aware of their
duties to dispose waste lawfully
and in a decent manner
Installing tube wells
Bowsers distributing
water
Waste Management
Identify the areas likely to spread dengue in the region
Control of Dengue
² Propose suitable measures to clean or destroy vector mosquito breeding places
² Prepare plans for public participation in such programmes and to get the
assistance from government/volunteer organizations/people of the region
For free distribution
For free distribution
iii. Proper implementation of plans
It is the responsibility of representatives of the people and government
officers in Local Government Institutions to see that these programmes meet
expected outcomes. At the same time, good supervision with such programmes
will help provide better services to the community.
Examples:
² Supervision of regional road constructions/repairs to ensure the proper standards.
² Supervise to see whether both garbage collectors and the public keep to their
duties properly in the management of garbage and when necessary they must
be given advice.
iv. Producing regional leaders
The main factor to the success of a democratic system of government is an
honest, efficient and noble political leadership. Regarding the regional administration
in a democratic system of a government, Local Government Institutions which are
given authority are also very closely attached to the public. Therefore, people who
live in that area has a right to elect exemplary political leaders of the region with
democratic qualities as the representations of Local Government Institutions. This
is a very important responsibility the public enjoys.
Representatives, elected in that manner, need to do their work devotedly
towards the public they serve to acquire knowledge about politics, experience
and training. Introducing such remarkable leaders to national politics is a very
important national service.
Following these procedures, Local Government Institutions can contribute
immensely to build up a prosperous Sri Lanka.
Activity 4.7
1. List a few good qualities that you feel a candidate should have, in
electing him for the Local Government Institution.
2. Prepare a list of daily activities that can be proceeded in preventing
the spread of Dengue in your home garden/ school.
3. Present your suggestions to manage garbage collected around
your house.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Summary
² Local Government Institutions are a set of special institutions
which have been established by the Central Government to execute
consumer services of people at regional level efficiently and
successfully.
² Local Government Institutions are comprised of representatives of people and
government officers.
² The concept of regional administration has existed in Sri Lanka from the
ruling periods of kings.
² Expansion of the modern Local Government Institutions have commenced
during the British rule.
² Laws enacted after independence have brought about changes to the system
of Local Government.
In Sri Lanka, there are now Municipal Councils, Urban Councils and
Pradeshiya Sabhas function under Local Government Institutions.
² Local Government Institutions provide a lot of services to help ease and make
better, the lives of the people.
² Fulfilling the duties and responsibilities played by people's representatives
and officers attached to Local Government Institutions help to continue the
same.
It is highly important to fulfil the duties and responsibilities of the people in
regard to the services provided by the Local Government Institution efficiently.
² Local Government Institutions are capable of providing a high contribution
to succeed the strategies of the national development through regional
development.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Conflict
Resolution
Introduction
Society consists of a large number of people. They differ from one another.
Such differences occur as a result of the differences of their opinions, beliefs,
education and economy. In fact conflicts occur constantly due to such differences.
As a result of conflicts there can be mental disturbances, stress, worries, violence
and harmful social activities. Conflicts may occur within a person, among
people, families, regions, countries as well as internationally. It is very important
to resolve such conflicts peacefully for the existence of human society and to
maintain sustainable peace in the society.
Studying this chapter you will be able to gain broader understanding about the
followings:
² Defining conflicts
² Causes for conflicts
² Parties that involve in conflicts
² Different types of conflicts
² Qualities need for conflict resolution
² Methods of conflict resolution
² Advantages of conflict resolution in positive manner
² Repercussion of not resolving conflicts in a positive manner
For free distribution
For free distribution
Defining conflicts
Given below are some of the views taken from a brain storming activity related to
the lesson ''Conflicts'':
Conflicts
occur due to impatience
conflicts occur not
only among humans but also
among animals
Conflicts
occur due to the
influence of external people
Conflicts
occur due to vicious
qualities such as anger, jealousy
Conflicts occur due
to our various beliefs as well as
doubts within us
conflicts
occur as a result of
diversity in thoughts
Not respecting
others mutually is the cause for
conflicts
Conflicts
are created for getting
resources and spreading ones
power
Yes, children, your ideas are very important. Let’s see
how to define a conflict.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Defining conflicts
“A situation in which people, group or countries are involved in a serious
disagreement or argument”
Oxford dictionary
It is clear that a conflict occurs in various forms such as riot, quarrel,
disagreement, argument, hitting or war.
Everybody has to face various types of conflicts in day to day life. Conflicts
can occur within a person, among friends, relatives and neighbours. There can
be conflicts among ethnic groups, political parties as well as religious groups. As
a result of resolving conflicts in a positive manner, there can be new ideas, new
creations and new relations.
If the conflicts are not resolved at the beginning, it will lead to a harmful
condition. In fact it is important to resolve conflicts at the beginning otherwise it
may destroy valuable human lives as well as the properties.
5.1 Causes for conflicts
Not being
socialized
Selfishness
Being invade
Being
Uneducated
Desire to gain
power
Causes for
conflicts
Being
aggressive
Imbalance of
resources
Social
differences
Being highly
sensitive
Taking decisions
without seeking
alternatives
Different
ideas
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 5.1
Remind an instance where you had to face a conflict. Line up the
reasons for that one by one.
² Write preventive steps that could have been taken to resolve that
conflict.
Parties involved in conflicts
² Within one self
² Between two people
² Within a family
² Among neighbours (among people/families/groups of people)
² Within one State or between two States
² Among many States
Various conflicts
Conflicts in the country can be categorized according to the nature of them.
Examples -
² Conflicts based on politics
Conflicts related to boundaries can be cited as
examples. There are conflicts between India and
Kashmeer for a long time.
² Conflicts based on economy
These conflicts are created due to many economic reasons such as obtaining
resources, poverty, capturing the market or broadening market. The conflict
between Irac and Quate for mineral oil can be cited as examples.
² Conflict based on society
Conflicts created due to various opinion among people/group of people/among
countries/religious groups or racial groups are some examples.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 5.2
Write an article to a newspaper about the danger of the conflicts of
the world to the human society.
5.2 Issues arising in conflict resolution
There can be various issues when resolving conflicts. Some examples are given
below:
² Rigidity
² Stick to one’s opinion
² Stick to one’s solution
² Not seeking alternatives
² No involvement of all the parties in conflict resolution
² Thinking of winning by defeating others
² One party is trying to win ignoring the opinion and needs of the other parties
The major issue of conflict resolution is the rigidity of both parties involved
in the conflict. The story given below tells us such situation:
Amindu and kavindu are Grade 9 students. They are classmates. Teacher
wanted to appoint a monitor. Both Amindu and Kavindu wanted to be the monitor.
But the teacher said that only one could be the monitor the other could be the vice.
But both of them wanted to get the leadership and they stuck to that opinion. As a
result teacher was unable to appoint a monitor.
Major obstacle for conflict resolution is that they stick to one opinion. The
story given below proves that:
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sandakirani and Prabashvara are siblings. One day there was a conflict
situation over a TV programme. One liked to watch a cartoon and the other
liked to watch a cricket match. Both tried to watch their programme at once.
There, a conflict occurred. Father resolved the conflict at the end.
Conflicts occur at different levels as parties that involved in conflicts stick
to one option,
Another cause for conflicts is that they do not seek alternatives, they will be
able to solve the problems easily.
² Watching programmes in different periods
² Watching programmes a week after week
² Watching programmes using the internet
² Watching another programme during that time
Activity 5.3
Select a country or a party that leads to conflicts. Study it and discuss
the obstacles of conflict resolution.
Qualities needed for conflict resolution
² Patience
² Active listening
² Kindness
² Friendliness
² Ability to make decisions
² Expressive ability
² Controlling emotions
² Respecting other's views
² Generosity
² Unbiased nature
² Respecting every body
² Fair judgement
² Respecting rights
² Fulfilling duties
Suitable methods of conflict resolution
There are many accepted methods of conflict resolution. Some examples
are given below:
For free distribution
For free distribution
Discussion
The most simple method of conflict resolution is discussion. Conflict
resolution is done by the parties involved through discussions. There, the both
parties can succeed in coming to “win – win” solution.
Involvement
Involvement is used to assist two persons or two groups or two countries
to settle a conflict when the discussion method is failed. This is a peaceful process.
Persons who are accepted by both parties or external parties can be used for this
purpose.
Situations where involvement can be used:
² Family conflicts
² Among groups of students
² Among ethnic groups
² Among countries
Mediation
Mediation can be introduced as another method of resolving a conflict of
disagreement. Conciliation is done by a board consists of mediators. The main
feature of mediation is that both the parties leading towards discussion to resolve
their conflicts. The Mediation Boards have been established by the Ministry of
Justice for Mediation.
Examples for some conflicts that can be resolved by Mediation Boards are given
below;
² Family conflicts
² Minor offences
² Conflicts among groups of people
Inquiry
Inquiry is a judiciary process. The parties involved in the conflict are advised
to come to a settlement at first and if it fails, the conflict is settled by a legal inquiry.
The verdict of the judiciary is final and the loser can appeal to a higher court of law.
Counselling
Counseling is directing towards conflict resolution by giving advice and
guiding, while providing facilities in various ways. Here making two parties aware
of benefits of positive conflict resolution and the consequences of conflicts, and
directing them to mitigate the conflicts are done.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 5.4
Observe how Mediation Board in your area resolves a conflict. Then
prepare a short report on conflict resolution.
5.3 Advantages of positive conflict resolution
The members brings up in such environment also exhibit unrest and
violence. Therefore, resolving family conflicts then and there results peace at home
as well as in the society.
Many countries and social groups conflicts each other nationally and
internationally due to racial, religious, civil wars etc. It is important to resolve
conflicts positively avoiding loss of life and property and being refugees.
Establishment of peace
Some advantages of positive conflict resolution are given below:
² Establishment of peace - Whenever a conflict occurs, peace breaks. When a
conflict occurs in mind, internal peace breaks. In the some way that the conflicts
occur between two people, among people, in the family among different people
in the society break peace. Resolving conflicts in a positive manner establishes
peace. In fact positive conflict resolution is essential for the establishment
of peace. This is important for oneself personally as well as for the society
commonly.
² Personal and social development - Conflicts always bring personal and social
deterioration of development. In fact positive conflict resolution causes for
personal and social development.
² Political stability - Generally conflicts damage the political stability of a
country. The state of political instability has severe negative impact on a country.
In fact positive conflict resolution causes for political stability.
² Minimizing waste of resources - Large amount of resources waste due to
conflicts. There is a waste of physical, human resources and time. Hence it is
very important to have positive conflict resolution for minimizing or avoiding
wastage of resources.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Some more advantages of positive conflict resolution are given below.
Discuss these factors with the teacher.
² Confidence building
² Minimizing mental stress
² Safeguard personal respect
² Building friendliness
² Developing social relations
² Developing cultural integrity
² Protection of human rights specially child rights and women rights
² Avoiding damages of lives/ property
² Widening of international relations
Increasing the arrival of investors
Consequences of not resolving conflicts positively
As not resolving conflicts positively, there is a negative impact on people as
well as society. Consequences of not solving conflicts using win - win method are
given below:
² Mental stress
² Being unpopular
² Having mutual suspicion and distrust
² Breaking down social relations
² Destruction of resources
² Breaking down in peace
Increasing unnecessary problems and expenditure
Widen your knowledge by discussing the above factors with your teacher, friends
and elders.
Positive conflict resolution is equally important for all the parties involved.
Advantages of positive conflict resolution can be considered as common factors
for everybody. At the same time the consequences of not resolving conflicts
positively can have negative impact on all the parties. In fact the parties involved
should do positive conflict resolution honestly and dedicatedly. By now you have
understood the impact on personal development as well as social development.
Positive conflict resolution causes for social peace and harmony not only that it
helps to develop social co-existence, reconciliation, brotherhood and freedom.
By means of that, the way is paved for the entire social peace. Children, let’s
forget all the disagreements and stand for peace. That is our duty today.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Summary
² Conflicts occur within one self among people, groups and among
countries.
² Conflicts occur due to various reasons and they develop.
² Conflicts are categorized basically based on the roots of conflicts
as political, economic and social conflicts.
In conflict resolution, there are a lot of challenges. Facing challenges bravely
resulted successful conflict resolution.
In conflict resolution, an individual must develop a large number of attributes,
personally as well as socially.
² Some examples of effective conflict resolution methods are discussion,
mediation and counseling.
² Positive conflict resolution paves the way for peace as well as it is beneficial
for the person and the society.
² Consequences of not resolving conflicts positively have to be faced by
everybody and it causes for the breaking of peace, co-existence, reconciliation
equity and sustainable peace of the society.
For free distribution
For free distribution
World of Work
Major responsibility of education today is to offer good citizens to the
society. The aim of education in schools should also be to offer a useful person
to the society. Education should offer the school children the necessary guidance
to face the future world of work successfully. For this, it is necessary to provide
facilities throughout the entire curriculum of the school.
To win the world of work:
² Selection of future job opportunities
² Fulfilling the required qualifications for job/career expectation are important
To fulfill such expectations, the study of this chapter will be of vital importance.
By study this chapter you will be able to understand the following:
Identifying the available professions/jobs/careers in the world of work
² Selecting a job/career having identified your skills/capabilities
² Preparation of job application forms and CV (Curriculum Vitae)
² Developing the skill of facing an interview
² Working efficiently and co-operatively in the place of work
² Maintaining balance between your profession/work/career and personal life
² Managing/preforming/handling one's own affairs, with a sound financial
management
Revise the lessons in Grade 8, your have learnt about the world of work.
For free distribution
For free distribution
6.1 Maintaining a personal profile
The figure below makes clear that there is a social as well as personal value
of every job or career.
Jobs/careers in the world of work
Before you consider a job, it is important to evaluate your own capabilities,
skills and preference. You may have different talents. You are the only person who
is well aware of them. In the selection of a field of career, your own choice will
be more important than one selected under the influence of the others. Therefore,
maintaining a personal profile, including your personal qualities, skills and desires
will be useful in search of a job in future.
When the teacher inquired the children about the things that should be
included in a personal profile, the following are some answers given by them;
Saman
- Teacher, it should have personal information as name, date of
birth, address, number of birth certificate, term test marks of
previous years, certificates achieved, details of awards, names
of parents, their occupations, telephone numbers, etc.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Nimali
Fareed
Nimali
Nazeefa
Teacher
Nazeefa
Kadireshani
Teacher
- Teacher, I think our personal qualities should also be included.
- What are they Nimali?
- Dedication, tolerance, determination, courage to face challenges
- What about our skills teacher?
- Yes, tell us.
- Communication skills, leadership, ability to work together, to
write, to sing, self-performance.
- Yes, not only that, our additional qualifications should also be
included. Certificates obtained in singing, debating, sports at
school level and outside can also be included.
- Yes, very good. Now isn't it clear that many things about you
can be included in the personal file? Maintaining a personal file
of this nature will be quite useful for any person's future.
Considering the answers of the students, the teacher has summarized the
facts that are to be included in a personal file. She put them on the black board as
follows:
1. Personal Information
² Name
² Address
² Telephone number
² Date of birth
² Age
² Educational qualifications
2. Personal qualities
² Dedication
² Pleasantness
² Friendliness
² Generosity
² Expressing ideas directly
3. Personal skills
² Aesthetic skills
² Sports skills
² Driving skills
² Language skills
4. Personal behaviour
² Sociability
² Ability to work alone
² Ability to work as a team
² Sharing
5. Experience at school
² Class monitor /Prefect
² Cadet
² Scout
² Vehicle pioneer
² Environmental pioneers
6. Experience outside the school
² Participating in shramdana campaign
² Participating in disaster management activities
² Assisting services in Elderly Homes, children
orphanages
² Welfare activities of students
² Working in various societies/ organizations
For free distribution
For free distribution
Let us see the importance of maintaining a personal file:
² To know about the capabilities and incapabilities
² To understand preferences
² To understand weaknesses and to avoid them
² To understand the skills that are to be developed
² To establish self esteem
² To get it helped in selecting a job
Activity 6.1
Pay attention to the facts that are to be included in a personal file.
Initiate an attractive personal file and take steps to maintain it.
6.2 Different professions and occupations in the world of work
World of work is also attractive as the natural world. Various professions
are available there. Possessing a knowledge of various professions in the world of
work is very important. This will be very helpful to you, when selecting a suitable
profession of your choice in future.
Various fields of occupations available in the world of work are shown below:
Various
professions
employments
Occupations in the
State and private
sector
Social welfare
services
Employer based
employments
Employee based
employments
State or private sector
Teachers, doctors,
labourers
Jobs aiming to
provide social service
Midwife,
environmental guides
Jobs initiated and
continued by oneself
Head of the institute
Proprietor
Employees as workers
of an institute
Teachers, Management
Assistants
Self-employments
One's own jobs
Voluntary
employments
Jobs done without a
profit motive
Taxi service, business
activities
Dhamma School
Teachers, Voluntary
teachers of schools
For free distribution
For free distribution
Employments can be categorized according to the place of work.
² Domestic/indoor employments - Engage in offices, shops, factories, etc.
² Outdoor employments - Farming, road construction, construction work, etc.
² Employments in fixed locations - In factories, in offices, in shops
² Mobile employments - Hawkers sale of goods by traveling, etc.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Have you seen some indigenous physicians treating free of charge? They
value self-satisfaction more than money. Even in paid occupations if we work with
pleasure, without limiting our service to money, it will be beneficial to the country,
as well as to you.
For continuous existence of society, it is essential to supply various Jobs and
services. Therefore, every job is important to the society equally. Every employment
has some value and dignity and acceptance at a high or low level. As some think, it
is not suitable to categorize employments as high ranking or low, the reason being
that every job is equally required by the society. It is clear that some are tempted to
categorize occupations on the basis of quantity of labour spent, expected income
or social status. But you may realize that such categorization is not suitable or
necessary.
Activity 6'2
Study job vacancies/advertisements in a week-end paper. Select and
entre them in the relevant column in the given three columns.
Government sector
employments
Private sector employments
Self-employments
6.3 Pathways for different employments
There are different pathways to enter a profession or an occupation. It should
be selected to suit and realize future hopes and goals. Thereby your educational
activities can be easily planned to suit the world of work. Your personal abilities,
preferences and skills should be considered. Some examples for such occasions are
given below:
² Selection of subject streams in the school
You who are studying in Grade 9 this year will enter Grade 10 next year.
There are six core-subjects and three basket subjects for you to select. On such an
occasion, there are some facts to be considered. For example, your ability to study
those subjects, desire and the connection with the future world of work are some of
For free distribution
For free distribution
them. Similarly, when selecting basket subjects, whatever the job you aim at,
special attention should be paid on Civic Education, a subject, which develops
attitudes, skills and knowledge to live as a good citizen. The reasons for that is
at present, or in future, in whatever job you are engaged in, value of humanity
stands above all.
Having passed the G. C. E. Ordinary Level examination, when you go to the
G. C. E. Advanced Level class, there are some streams like Science, Mathematics,
Vocational/Technical subjects, Commerce and Arts. In such a situation, selection of
the stream and subjects should be done to your expectations.
A/L subjects
Science stream
Mathematical
stream
Commerce
stream
Technical
subject stream
Art stream
Examples of available
jobs/professions
Medical, dentistry, Administration service,
laboratory technicians, nursing, teaching, etc.
Engineering,
engineering,
Draftsman, etc.
computer
Administration
electrical
service,
Administration
service,
Managers,
Accountants, Accounts clerks, Businessman,
assessors, teachers etc.
Computing, motor mechanism, electricians,
machine repairing, teaching, etc.
Administration service, lawyers, teaching,
supply of services, Clerical, Salesman,
teaching profession, etc.
According to the above table, it will be clear to you that attention should be
paid on the fields of jobs. Selection of subject streams should be done on your own
will and ability and not on the wants and desires of the others. This will be more
useful for your future.
² Academic/ Professional qualifications
In the selection of a job, it is required to have academic and vocational
qualifications.
Academic
qualifications -
G.C.E. (O/L) G.C.E. (A/L) Diploma (example: Music,
Agriculture, etc.)
Degree (Science, Arts, Commerce, Technology, etc.)
For free distribution
For free distribution
Professional
qualifications -
Qualifications related to the job engaging at present or to be
engaged in future.
Example: Diploma for teaching profession,
Training in Teachers' Colleges, Bachelor of education
Postgraduate Diploma in Education
² Formal and in-service job training
In the world of work, persons with academic and professional qualifications,
skilled and creative abilities have a great demand. At present, there are various
institutions and various courses for formal training for jobs. In Sri Lanka, to qualify
for professions, the NVQ (National Vocational Qualification) has been introduced.
Under this, short term, full time and diploma courses are conducted by the institutes
like the National Youth Services Council. To obtain degrees, a Vocational University
has also been established.
Institutions and courses for professional training are shown in the diagram below:
Professional training
Institutions
Courses
² Technical Colleges
² Vocational Training
Centre
² National Apprenticeship
Board
² Hotel School
² Nurses' Training Schools
² Agriculture Schools
² Technical Universities
² Law College
² Vidatha Centers
² Motor Mechanism
² Computer training
² Beauty culture
² Food processing (Culinary
science)
² Electricians
² Draftsmen
² Nurses' Training
In addition to above professions, pre-service and in-service training are
given after recruitment as well as before recruitment.
(Examples: Teaching profession, Operating machines, etc.)
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 6.3
Get the students to collect information on institutions for professional
training and exchange them with the other friends in the class.
There are many institutions to get information on professional courses:
² Department of Technical Education and Training
² National Apprenticeship Institute and Technical Training
Authority
² Vocational Training Authority
² National Youth Council
Other than these, information on professional courses can be obtained from
newspapers, gazettes and the Internet.
6.4 Required qualifications and experience for jobs professions
Importance of selecting subject streams for jobs
Qualifications alone are not sufficient to do a job or a profession. For that, it
is important to have experience too. Specially for professions like medical and law,
it is compulsory to complete prior experience.
Specially as students, it is very important for you to select the subject
stream to suit your career pathway. An extract from a speech made by a speaker,
at a workshop held for students who have passed G. C. E. O/L examination in the
selection of subject stream, is given below:
''You are now getting ready to overcome the second step. But, for that, it is
important to select suitable subjects and suitable streams. First think of the job
you are going to do in future. For example, if you wish to seek a job in the field
of banking, what subject stream should you select? Isn't it the commerce stream
that you should select?
Mentioned above is only one fact. In addition to that, what are the things that should
be considered when selecting a subject stream?
For free distribution
For free distribution
1. Whether the subject streams suit your skills
2. What are the other educational and training courses that could be followed
through those subject streams?
3. Whether there are chances for higher education through the selected
subject stream?
4. Whether there is a possibility to pursue studies in the selected subject
stream in your school?
5. What would be the job opportunities in future on the selected subject
stream?
If you can answer these questions successfully, you will be able to enter the
world of work diligently in future. It will be clear to you that many students of the
present day, select subject streams on the wish of the parents, as the other students
do the same subjects or they can go to an urban school. So, can you see in society
that there are many who fail examinations and unable to face life successfully?
Nimal
- Teacher, are there any other needs to consider when selecting
jobs?
Teacher
- Yes, Nimal, besides subject streams, there are many other
things. One is academic, timely, emotional and physical
demand
Thamara
- What does that mean teacher?
Teacher
- For every job, there are special academic qualifications. Look
at this table;
Occupation/ profession
Teaching profession
Legal profession
Medical Profession
Nursing
Filed of Accountancy
Academic qualifications
Degree, passing A/L
Degree in Law
Medical Degree
Pass in A/L Science stream
Pass in AAT, CIMA examinations
Teacher
Is it clear now?
Careemdeen
- Yes teacher, but what is timely demand?
Teacher
It means, qualifications for various jobs may vary from time to
time. At present, to be a clerk, a pass in A/L is sufficient. But
later it may require a degree instead.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Neranjan
Teacher
Kasun
Teacher
- Then what is physical and mental demand?
It means to do a job, there should be a good mental readiness
and a good physical fitness. If physically disabled, a driver's
job cannot be done. Can he?
Ok, did you understand now? Then, when you go home
today, refer to some papers and scrutinize job advertisements.
Write down academic qualifications for five jobs.
- Teacher, is it necessary to have a special experience for jobs?
- Yes, to be a teacher, a special training is necessary. A relevant
degree and a professional training is essential. For example,
we can cite training in a College of Education or Post Graduate
Diploma. For the job of a driver, it needs a special experience.
For occupations like motor vehicle repairing, house-wiring,
medical profession, a practical training is made compulsory.
Further, a different exceptional courses also can be followed.
For instance a clerk can follow a Computer Science Course
and earn additional income.
Have you seen advertisements published for jobs? Newspapers, gazette
notifications, Internet, and websites are mostly used as media for this purpose.
Other than those banners and notices and handbills are also used.
In the past, the easiest way of getting vocational training was from family
members. Agriculture, fishing and carpentry are examples.
A child doing carpentry work with
father
A child doing agriculture with father
You also may have similar experiences. You too can get vocational
training and knowledge from the employments of the family members. It does
not mean that the same job of parents should be followed. But you can get the
initial training and valuable experience by that, to do a job. Also you will have the
self-esteem of your capability to do something.
It may be clear to you now educational qualifications and experience have
equal importance in doing a job.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Activity 6.4
Examine the job vacancies available in newspapers, gazettes and
Internet.
1. Electrician
Required
Pass in G. C. E. O/L, Having
followed a Technical course
Experience
One year experience in a
reputed institute.
............................................
.........................................
6.5 Preparing a Curriculum Vitae
Curriculum Vitae is forwarded, when applying for a job. The word
Curriculum Vitae. Which is derived from Latin, means a record of life routine.
Curriculum Vitae can be identified as a complete personal profile.
Gazette notification for job vacancy
For free distribution
For free distribution
A N C
Competitive Examination for the Recruitment of Graduates to
Grade 3 - 1 (a) of Sri Lanka Teachers’ Service for the
Vacancies Existing in G. C. E. (A/L) Sinhala, Tamil and
English Medium Teaching in National Schools – 2017
Website
Handbill
There are 3 main ways for us to respond to a job advertisement
Paper advertisement
1. By a bio-data from
2. By a job application
3. By a letter
Next, let us examine how Curriculum Vitae is prepared.
It is important to prepare your Curriculum Vitae to be prominent and
attractive. It should not be too long, but should contain all the essential information.
Following information has been indicated to show the importance of a proper
Curriculum Vitae by Bright and Earl, 2001.
For free distribution
For free distribution
² At present a Curriculum Vitae has become an essential thing for everybody.
² Ability to get a complete picture of you from your Curriculum Vitae.
² Your intention should be to make the Curriculum Vitae attractive from the
others.
² There is a competition in the job market at present.
It minimizes the nuisance of time and job expectation.
iuka Èidkdhl
Saman Disanayaka
fkd' 10" wr,sh Whk"
No.20.Araliya Uyana
wkqrdOmqr'
Anuradhapura
ÿ'w' 0112555762
Email - ghnisa@gmail.com
Bfï,a ( ghnjsa@gmail.com
mrud¾:h
Educational qualifications
wOHdmk iqÿiqlï
1. G.C.E. (A/L)
^1& w'fmd'i' ^W$fm<& úNd.h ^2009&
Subject
fY%aKsh
Grade
2. G.C.E. (O/L)
^2& w'fmd'i' ^id$fm<& úNd.h ^2006&
Subject
fY%aKsh
Grade
Professional/other qualifications
jD;a;suh $ fjk;a iqÿiqlï
úIh ndysr l%shdldrlï
Extra curricular activities
cdhdrEmh
Photo
Personal Information
fm!oa.,sl f;dr;=re
Full name :
 iïmQ¾K ku (
 ,smskh (
 uq,l=re iuÕ ku (
Name with initials :
Address :
Date of Birth :
 Wmka Èkh (
Gender :
 ia;%S$mqreI Ndjh (
Civil Status :
 újdyl$ wújdyl nj (
 cd;sh (
Nationality :
 mdi, (
School :
úuish yels fofofkla ^{d;Ska fkdjk&
Two non-related
1& 2&
I here by certify that the above information are to the best of my
by; i|yka f;dr;=re udf.a ±kqug mokïj i;H yd ksjerÈ njg iy;sl fjñ'
knowledge true and accurate
…………………. ……………
w;aik
Signature
Shown below is an example of features that could be included in a Curriculum
Vitae;
Personal information
Name, address, city, country, telephone number, e-mail address, date of birth,
citizenship, gender, civil status, particulars of children etc.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Educational qualifications
School education, higher educational institutions, certificates obtained,
(including institution, year, standard of the certificate)
Professional qualifications (relevant experience)
Relevant experience for the job, special skills for that, etc.
Previous job details
Institutes, job duration, designation, trainings, scholarships and achievements
of the previous work place, if a job had been done.
Skills
Sports skills, aesthetic skills, writing skills, skills in language proficiency, etc.
Awards achieved
Awards achieved (if any) on your special skills/aptitudes, achievements (special
medals, patent rights, etc.)
Publications
Articles, books, research reports, (if any) published by you.
Professional membership
If you have held posts in other professional organizations, particulars of them
posts held in social organizations, particulars of membership.
Qualities
Dedication on entrusted responsibilities, tolerance, and friendliness, generosity,
etc are examples.
Hobbies and preferences
These can be mentioned very briefly.
(Non-related referees)
It is necessary to name two persons, who are not your close relatives. Their
names, telephone numbers, addresses and posts, etc. should be given.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Let us prepare an attractive Curriculum Vitae
When entering into the world of work, a keen competition can be seen.
Therefore, your Curriculum Vitae profile should be attractive and prominent, out of
other profiles. The diagram below shows a few facts regarding the preparation of
such a Curriculum Vitae profile.
State the required information clearly and accurately
Include a clear photograph
State information, the special skills and achievements
State all particulars about you
State the professional qualifications, and experience,
related to the job applying for
State the experience related to the job applied
Cleanliness
Attractive finishing
Should be short and simple
Include only true particulars
Activity 6.5
Prepare your Curriculum Vitae, including your particulars. Attach it to
the personal file you have prepared earlier.
6.6 Completing a job application form correctly
The following is an extract of a discussion between two Grade 8 students
Shameera
- Nimal do you know that my brother fills in applications for
jobs everyday?
Nimal
- Oh! what's it? My brother too is the same. But so far, not a
single interview called for.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Shameera
- My brother says he doesn't know if his way of filling in
applications is correct. He says that may be the reason for not
calling interviews for him.
Nimal:
- There our teacher is coming. Let us ask how to fill in an
application form.
² How to fill a job application
Sometimes, a model application form for a job is supplied along with the
advertisement. Some application forms can be bought from the market. Similarly,
in some job advertisements, instructions are given to send an application written in
one's own hand-writing. In such an instance, it is quite essential to prepare a rough
copy of the job application. Let us first see the importance of preparing such a
rough copy of the job application.
Importance of
filing in a rough
copy of an
application
Avoid shortcomings when writing an application
Get a clear understanding of the space given
and how to prepare the job application
Remove unnecessary information, if written
Check all the information to be included
Prepare an application accurately, with a clear
finishing
Retain a copy of the qualification with you
Get corrections done by another
For free distribution
For free distribution
Application for the post of temporary driver Global Link corporation
year :
1. Name with initials :
2. Initials stand for :
3. Permanent Address :
4. Permanent district :
5. Gender :
6. Date of birth :
month :
7. Age as on the final date of submitting application :
8. Citizenship by generation or registration :
9. Civil status :
10. National Identity Card Number :
11. Telephone Number :
12. Educational Qualifications :
13. Professional and other qualifications :
14. Service experience :
15. If being accused at court, explain the punishment
Date :
I certify hereby the information given above are true and accurate. If these,
information are found inaccurate, I will become ineligible before appointing
and if such found after appointing the service will be terminated.
Date : ...............................
.........................................
Signature of the applicant
At the very first sight, although a Curriculum Vitae profile and a job
application look similar, yet it is clear to you from this picture that a job application
is different from a Curriculum Vitae form.
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Basic factors to be considered when filling in an application.
To follow the given
instructions correctly
To fill in all the
information in the
application
Use only the blank
space or the square
given
Forward the application
without waiting for the
closing date
It is important to have
a copy of the last
application sent
Factors to be
considered,
when filling in an
application
Before filling the
application, get a
photo-copy and fill that
first
To give correct
information to what is
asked for
Instead of leaving
blank space, to write
"inapplicable" in such
blanks
To use clear hand writing
or computing
It is important to keep a copy of the application from, a copy of the
advertisement for the job and the receipt you get for registering the application, if
you need to make an enquiry later on.
When applying for a job, the Curriculum Vitae form has to be attached to
the application. It is important to attach a covering letter with the application.
6.7 Writing a letter for a job vacancy
Sometimes, when applying for a job, instead of sending a Curriculum Vitae
profile, or an application, it can be done by a letter too.
Remember the factors that should be mentioned in the application or the
Curriculum Vitae. A summary of those factors should be stated in writing a letter.
According to your letter, the employer will make a pre-evaluation of you.
The letter should be well written and forwarded to attract the receiver.
For free distribution
For free distribution
M.P. Samarapala
No. 36, Uda Para
Ja Ela
28.08.2017
The Chairman,
Ja Ela Pradeshiya Saba,
Kandana
Dear Sir,
Recruiting for the post of Temporary Driver
This is with reference to the newspaper advertisement on 25.08.2017.
According to the advertisement, I wish to apply for the post of temporary
driver. I, who completed my education up to G.C.E. (O/L) have a heavy
vehicle licence too. I have worked as a driver for more than 3 years in
Udayasiri Company. Further, I would like to mention that I have physical
qualifications as mentioned in the advertisement as required. Certificates
related to the qualifications and experience are attached herewith.
Accordingly, I kindly request you to recruite me to the above post and I
wish to inform that I will work to my level best if I am enlisted.
Thanking you,
Yours sincerely,
………………………….
M.P. Samarapala
Mentioned below are some factors to consider when writing a letter for
jobs. What you studied in your Sinhala lesson in writing an official letter will be
useful for you.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Importance of preparing a draft for the letter of application
- Ability to give logical sequence of content
e.g. : First, include the facts to be stated first, and later ones the later.
- Ability to include all the information required
e.g. : Educational qualifications, experience, preferences and hobbies.
- Ability to present important factors in an order
- Ability to write the letter accurately
Logical sequence of the content in a letter
e.g. : The letter is from whom, name, address and date
The letter is for whom; Name, Designation
Address of the receiver
Title of the letter
Basic factors to be included in the letter
² Date of the newspaper or gazette in which the vacancy is advertised
- Information required from the advertisement.
- Answering all the points relevant as mentioned in the advertisement
e.g. : professional skills/ achievements
- Attractive presentation of information
To forward the application attractively;
- the highest qualification you possess
- Achievements at national and international level, are very important to
be stated.
Importance of responding to the vacancy before the closing date
The advertisement itself mentions the closing date for applying for a job.
It is important to send the application before the deadline due to the following
reasons:
² To avoid the delay in the post
² To facilitate the employer to take future steps regarding the vacancy
² Ability for the employer to understand the interest of the applicant for
the vacancy
For free distribution
For free distribution
It is very important to forward your letter to be received before the closing
date. By that you can show your interest and it makes your letter more attractive
than the others.
Activity 6.6
An advertisement was published in a weekend newspaper regarding
vacancies of masons in a work site of State Engineering Cooperation.
Prepare a letter to apply for the above post. Act a role play a mock
interview for that.
6.8 Developing of interview skills
After applying for a job, the next-step is to face an interview, when called for.
An interview is a verbal test, conducted by the employer to examine
your suitability for enrolment to the expected job/occupation.
² Ways of conducting interviews
There are 3 types of interviews conducted to select for jobs.
I. Individual interview
Head of the institution himself questions the candidate verbally. Interviews
of this nature are conducted, specially in the private sector to enroll workers for
business enterprises, garment factories owned by a single person.
For free distribution
For free distribution
II. Group interview
These interviews are held to enroll workers for government and large
scale private sector institutions. Generally there can be two or more persons in the
interview board. When selecting for high level occupations, there can be about five
people seen in the interview board.
III. Practical interview
For free distribution
For free distribution
Sometimes for jobs that need to test practical skills, practical tests are
conducted in addition to verbal interviews. Specially in the case of computers,
jobs in the technical field and music and dancing, practical tests are conducted. At
present at the recruitment of teachers also, practical tests are conducted.
Importance of developing interview skills
It is essential to face interviews with a prior preparation. It is great to be
successful at the interview, when a number of persons participate in the interview,
for the same job, with equal qualifications as yours. If you can face successfully,
you will be able to get a job and if you fail, you will live without a job for a long
time.
To face an interview successfully, Charlie Marshalls 2016 has indicated
some procedures to follow:
² Wear a formal dress properly. It is not suitable to go in a simple dress. Your
dress should show your personality and an attractive look.
² Take an additional bio-data sheet, a note book, a pen and other necessary
things
² Do a rehearsal
² Get a good knowledge of the institution that you go for the interview
² Work to scheduled time. Go to the relevant place of interview early.
² Do not argue or be critical with the interviewer or the board.
² Answer the questions frankly, honestly and not in a debatable manner.
² During the time of interview, show your politeness and learnedness.
² Never boast of yourself over the limit. Try to be you yourself.
If you had been employed earlier, never express condemnation statements.
² During the time of interview, maintain your body language and speech
positively.
When facing an interview, it is natural for any person to be stressful or be
excited. A proper training will minimize stress and enable to face the interview
successfully.
Activity 6.7
Group the students in the class into two groups and hold a mock
interview as a role play.
For free distribution
For free distribution
6.9 Importance of facing an interview well
The perception formed about you at the interview will stand important a
long way. How qualified you are, your selection or rejection will be decided on the
way you face the interview.
The following are some instructions given by the teacher in charge of Civic
Education to a group of students, how to face an interview successfully.
Nimal:
Teacher:
Nimal:
Teacher:
Nimal:
Teacher:
Rajini:
Teacher:
Abdul:
Teacher:
- Sir, our brother is scared because he has an interview tomorrow.
- Needn't to be scared when you learn how to face an interview,
it will be ok.
- How is it sir? Please tell us.
- The first thing is our personal appearance
- What's the personal appearance sir?
- When we appear for an interview, our dress, the way of the
hair cut, our make-up etc.
It is not good to do too much of make-up. Isn't it, sir?
- Quite right Rajini. You must be simple and charming. Then
only the interviewers will be pleased
- What are the other important things sir?
- Wait. I'll tell you. Look at this poster.
Factors that should be considered when appearing for an interview
- Personal appearance
² Do your hair in a suitable way
² Make up
² Dress
- Body Language
² Sitting posture
² Eye contact
² Facial expressions
² Use of hands
For free distribution
For free distribution
- Attention and interest
² Maintaining a good rapport with the interview board
² Require a training to win the attention of the interview board in a
disciplined way
² Pay attention and reply directly to questions of the interview board
² Appear before the interview board diligently and without laziness
- Speech and use of language
² To speak clearly and audible enough to be heard by the interview board
² Using the language politely and courteously
- Being courteous
² When entering and leaving the place where interview is held, behave
politely
² Address respectfully and be disciplined when taking seat and leaving
² Answer the questions of the interview board respectfully and politely
² Behave before the interview board respectfully
An interview is a competitive stage. Sometimes 10 or 15 candidates may
appear for the same job. Here, if you wish to get a better place over the others,
you should face the situation in a good manner. Whatever certificates you possess,
perhaps another with less educational qualifications may get the job as he or she
faced the interview successfully.
Activity 6.8
"Write an essay on "if you want to pass the interview" suitable to be
published in a newspaper.
6.10 Proper time management
After passing the interview, you are able to get the job. If you want to be
successful in your job there are many qualities to be developed. Given below are
some examples:
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Determination and dedication ² cultivating dignity of labour ² working in
response to the expectations of the employer to attend to employees' needs ²
cultivating efficiency and productivity ² proper time management ² accurate
finance management ² personal behaviour ² maintenance of balance between
occupation and personal life.
Out of the above skills, the most important is the time management, because
the value of time is a resource. There is an old saying, "Time is golden" to show the
value of time. To make activities in the job to be successful, time should be divided
according to the work. That is Time Management.
Ability to work in
accordance with rules and
regulations of the institution
Ability to complete/finish your
duty in time
Ability to satisfy the clients
No delay in work
Importance
of time
management
Ability to win a good name in
the institution
Ability to work without
mental stress
Ability to fulfill the
objectives of the institution
Ability to stop the wastage
of resources
Given below are some methods for time management:
² To understand the duties assigned to you well
² To arrange them in the order of priority
² To allocate a time limit for each duty
² To follow a daily time table
² To assess the progress of the scheduled work at the end of the day
Inquire reasons for delay and incomplete duties
² To arrange an alternative plan when taking leave
For free distribution
For free distribution
A person can divide one's time into three parts as given below;
Personal time
Time for work
Time for studies
Time to be spent for personal affairs is introduced
like this. It should be used apart from time of
duty.
Time you have to spend to work in the office
or work site is called this. In Sri Lanka, it is
considered as eight hours.
Time allocated for training and completion of
qualifications is called this. Sometimes leave
is granted by the institutions and directed for
educational activities.
As the employers always pay their attention on efficiency and productivity, Time
Management is highly important.
Efficiency: using limited resources to the maximum
Productivity: achieving initially planned aims in the same way
If time is not managed properly, it is difficult to gain efficiency and productivity.
Concern of the employer on productivity and efficiency
It is the expectation of every employer to maintain productivity and
efficiency in his institution.
² Therefore, it is the right of employers to expect a service from the employees,
in return for money and other facilities offered to them.
² So that the employee should consider it as his right and his duty to do the
service without any reluctance.
If these duties are well performed, institutions can reach productivity and
efficiency very easily.
For free distribution
For free distribution
This story is told of an unannounced visit by John F. Kennedy to the
space center at Cape Canaveral in the mid 1960s. Kennady toured the
complex and met a man “What do you do here?” he asked. The man
replied, “I’m earning a living.” Kennady nodded and moved on. He
met another man and asked the same question. “I clean away all the
rabbish” the man said. Kennady smiled and strode on until he met another man
and put the same question again. This time a big smile came across the face of the
man who replied, “My President, I am helping to put a man on the moon.”
When you employ in an institute, you should have a wide intention to
achieve the broad vision of the institute more the little work you do for it, or the
wage that you obtain for it.
Activity 6.9
1. Prepare a daily time table to do your school activities.
2. Prepare an article on 'Importance of Time Management as a citizen.
6.11 Maintaining personal behaviour
In an institution there are people engaged in different levels of occupations.
Therefore, it is essential to maintain your personal conduct well in the place of
work. We must keep in mind that behavioural problems of a person will have
adverse effects on the others too.
The chart below shows some facts to consider regarding personal behaviour:
Respecting every designation
of the institution
Maintaining a sound
communication
Treating employees in a
friendly manner
Characteristics
of meticulous
personal conduct/
behaviour
Working with maximum
dedication
Not taking leave unnecessarily
Performing your
responsibilities properly
Dress in a proper manner
For free distribution
For free distribution
When the institution has faced some difficult situations, all should work
collectively and protect from such adverse conditions.
It is the responsibility of every employee to maintain his own behaviour in
and out of the institution, to protect its dignity.
In addition to this, there are a few behavioural patterns to be followed by the
employees;
² To behave in such a way that your behaviour may not harm or bring dishonour
to the others
² Adjust your behaviour in order to achieve the objectives of the institution
² Report for work on time
² Not to delay work unnecessarily
² Offer your service to the institution voluntarily at times of need
² Work to use the resources to the maximum
² Not to harm the good name of the institution
The behaviour of the employee directly influences the good name of the
institution. Personal behaviour of every individual affects the activities of others
and on their behaviour itself positively or negatively.
To be drunk on while on duty, chewing betel, smoking, malpractices, getting
bribes, keeping away from place of work unnecessarily and engaging in
corruptions will bring dishonour to the institution.
Specially to report for work on time, engage in work during working
hours and leaving on time are important. To systematize attendance, most of the
institutions have introduced marking the card and placing finger print instead of
the signature book. One should be mindful the behaviour outside the working place
6.12 Proper personal financial management
Income and expenditure
It is necessary for any person to have some income to live. For that, to
engage in some occupation or profession is essential. If not, he must have some
other way of getting an income such as subsidies or donations.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Personal Financial Management
Income
Expenditure
Salary
Interest
Profits
Subsidiaries
Donations
Loans
Consumption
Education
Paying loans
Maintenance
Investments
For free distribution
For free distribution
Pay Slip
For a successful living, it is essential to spend within the income. In this
regard, it is needed to use money carefully.
Spending money in normal or emergency situations
As there can be instances where one has to allocate money for day to day
activities, as well as at emergencies, one must possess enough money.
² Opening and maintaining bank account
In utilizing money, maintaining a bank account, makes day to day financial
transactions easy, provides financial security and an extra income. Obtaining an
interest monthly or annually from a fixed deposit in a bank can be cited as an
example. Through which personal financial management too, takes place.
² Savings for future
It is essential to save money for future in personal finance management due
to following reasons:
If there is a break down in earning under the expected conditions of income
² Use in unexpected problematic situations, if any emergency causes
² To be used at old age or after retirement
² To live without being burden to the others
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Avoid dealing with loans for consumptions
It is always advantageous dealing with loans, in your financial management.
There can be unexpected troubles when dealing with loans or giving loans in day to
day activities.
Specially, one should not take loans for daily consumption. It is important
to manage the expenditure according to one's income.
² Advantages and disadvantages of using credit cards
What do you know of credit cards? A credit card is a way of taking money
on credit.
Picture of credit cards
Your family members also may have similar cards. Discuss with them how
to use credit cards. There are advantages and disadvantages of using these cards:
Advantages
Disadvantages
² Better security than portability of
money
² Decides on the maximum credit
level for a person
Interest
payment
time period
² A tendency to go for unaffordable
consumption due to use of credit cards
² A high rate of interest is charged
² Possibility for an outsider to misuse
² Getting
additional
charges
payments
For free distribution
For free distribution
² Ability to get various rewards on
the amount spent
² Ability to transact with any kind
² Sudden change of conditions
² Tendency to spend lavishly
² An extra charge is added for delay in
of currency
payment of balance
² Credit facilities on emergencies
² Ability to pay bills in time
² Becoming a long-time debtor
² Charging high annual fees
The main problem specially when using credit cards without a limit for
services and goods is that we inescapably become long-term debtors to credit card
companies.
The use of credit cards is suitable for busy people with a permanent income,
for systematic payment of water and electricity bills. Those who are not frugal
in spending and heavily in debts, without a permanent income, will face more
problems by the use of credit cards.
Investing or saving for future
It means that the investing or saving money for future business or for making
personal life successful.
Example: Investing in business, Investing in fixed deposits
The pension or the provident fund rights at old age should be managed and
utilised with a good management very carefully.
If you are engaged in a job where no pension or provident fund or other
benefits are given, it is important to manage savings and finance in a methodical
way for the future.
Similarly, it is important that we should save some money for the future
from the income we derive from the occupation. When it happens to leave the
job or go on retirement, the money, thus saved could be made use of. In an urgent
necessity of money this saving could be used as for a loan. If employed in a job with
no pension, this saving could be used for future investment.
It is important to spend the money derived from the pension or Employees'
Provident Fund in a balanced way. Specially when you are without a job, your
value also depreciates. In such an instance, if this money is invested properly to get
an additional income, you will be able to lead a happy life of retirement. At present,
banks have made arrangements on the savings of senior citizens to offer a higher
rate of interest and special concessions.
Activity 6.10
Prepare an article to a newspaper on ‘Advantages and disadvantages of
using credit cards’.
For free distribution
For free distribution
6.13 Maintaining a balance between work and personal life
It is very important to keep balance between work and personal life, not
allowing problems to arise. When work and personal life are entangled with each
other, both occupation and life will be bitter. Leaving for home after finishing
duties of the job in the office itself, we can have a successful personal life. To work
over time to earn more than what is required, and to engage in additional activities
make the personal life problematic. Spending a few hours with family together,
is necessity. Household activities, educational activities of children, taking meals
together, engage in pleasure trips, engage in sports, participation in religious
activities and engaging in social service and family affairs will promote physical
and mental health.
As well giving preference to personal life, neglecting professional work
may cause displeasure among employers, employees and other workers of the
institution. Therefore, it is important to have a balance in personal, social and
professional life.
A person has to pay attention to five activities in daily life;
Professional Life
Personal Life
Family Life
Social Life
Spiritual Life
Activities pertaining to the job, preparation of
documents, participation in meetings, engaging in
training programmes
Meeting friends and relations, doing further
education, maintaining personal hygiene
Children’s education, going on picnics, renovating
the house, preparation of food, getting treatments
for illnesses
Participation in societies of the area, helping public
service, patronizing religious activities
Building up spiritual development, religious
activities, moving to a religious life
Performing these activities in a balanced way, makes a life successful.
Refraining from taking liquor, drugs and smoking, keeping away from bad friends,
not to engage in anti-social activities and keeping away from corruptions and frauds
help to keep a balance of life.
For free distribution
For free distribution
Financial difficulties can be regarded as a main cause for professional and
family problems. Financial problems arise due to excessive spending of income. It
is essential to control unnecessary and extra expenses to manage with the income.
When financial difficulties arise, attention should be drawn to get assistance from
close friends. You can borrow money from parents or friends. If you are used to
credit cards or to borrow on interest, the problems will aggravate and will never be
able to get rid of it. Planned or systematic management raises the efficiency and
productivity of the institution, whereby the employer is benefited. It paves the way
for a successful personal life. Money is needed for life, but it is important to bear in
mind that money is not life.
Activity 6.11
Write an essay one Systematic work enhances personal life and
occupation’.
Summary
² One will be able to understand self, when a personal file is
maintained from childhood.
² Before selecting a job, understanding one’s skills abilities and
preferences facilitate the selection of the most suitable occupation.
² There are many job opportunities in the world of work. It is important to
analyze them carefully and select the most suitable job for you.
² Filling in a bio-data from or an application for a job accurately, will make it
easy to win the competitive world of work.
² An understanding of the different interviews and receiving a training to face
them successfully will be of tremendous help to win the future targets in life.
² Time management and finance management is essential for a successful life.
² Maintaining the personal conduct well, will be equally important for personal
life as well as for professional life.
² Maintaining a balance between personal as well as professional life immensely
helps to build up personal and social development.
For free distribution
For free distribution