Contents
10. Electrolysis
Electrolysis
Changes caused in a solution by an electric current
Electroplating
10.1
10.2
10.3
11. Density
11.1
11.2
11.3
Introduction to density
Units of density
Hydrometers
12. Bio-diversity
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
Introduction to bio-diversity
Importance of bio-diversity
Threats to bio-diversity
Important features of ecosystems
Natural ecosystems and built environment
13. Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Artificial environment and green concept
Agricultural process
Industrial process
13.1
13.2
13.3
14. Reflection and Refraction of Waves
14.1
14.2
14.3
Reflection of light
Sound
Refraction of light
Page
01
01
02
05
10
10
11
13
19
19
22
23
25
29
42
42
44
50
58
58
69
75
xi
15. Simple Machines
Lever
Inclined plane
Wheel and axle
Pulleys
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
16. Nanotechnology and its Applications
16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
Nanometer
Nanotechnology
Applications of nanotechnology
Future condition that may arise because of nanotechnology
17. Lightning Accidents
17.1
17.2
How lightning occurs
Prevention of lightning accidents
18. Natural Disasters
Cyclones
Earthquakes
Tsunami
Wild fires
The relationship between increase in global warming
and natural disasters
18.1
18.2
18.3
18.4
18.5
19. Sustainable Use of Natural Resources
19.1
19.2
19.3
Water
Minerals and rocks
Trees
Cover Page :- Represents Green Concept
84
86
93
95
97
103
104
105
112
115
119
120
125
129
129
134
141
145
146
152
153
155
161
xii
10
10.1 Electrolysis
Electrolysis
There was a news item of a woman who has been cooking food keeping an
aluminum pan on a electric leaky hot plate was struck with an electric shock when
she was pouring coconut milk into the curry. She had got the shock even though
she was not touching the pan. How would this have happened? The leaking electric
current should have passed through coconut milk and entered the woman's body.
Your elders must have told you that connecting electric plugs with wet hands is
dangerous. The reason for the electric leaks stated above should be the conduction
of electricity through a liquid medium.
Let us do activity 10.1 to find out whether electricity is conducted through any
substance in liquid state.
Activity 10.1
You will need :- A beaker, two carbon rods, an ammeter, two dry cells (1.5
V), connecting wires, kerosene, salt solution, acidified water,
copper sulphate solution, distilled water
Method:-
² Connect the ammeter and the two dry cells
to the two carbon rods as shown in the figure.
10.1. Dip the two carbon rods partially in
the liquid/solution.
+ -
A
Carbon rods
² Pour the liquids/solutions given above into
Liquid or Solution
the beaker.
² Observe whether there is a deflection in the
ammeter.
² Tabulate your observation.
Figure 10.1
It is seen here that the ammeter deflects only when some liquids/solutions are used.
PB
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
1
Table 10.1
Liquids/solution causing a
deflection in the ammeter
Liquids/solutions not causing
a deflection in the ammeter
Salt solution
Copper sulphate solution
Acidified water
Kerosene
Distilled water
Indicator of the ammeter deflects when a current passes through it. Therefore, a
current has passed through the solutions resulting a deflection in the ammeter. The
solutions of salt, copper sulphate and acidified water, all contain mobile ions. These
solutions conduct electricity through these mobile ions. Liquids or solutions which
conduct electricity are called electrolytes.
Since kerosene and distilled water do not conduct electricity, they do not bring about
a deflection in the ammeter. Such liquids/solutions do not conduct electricity as
they do not contain mobile ions. Liquids/solutions which do not conduct electricity
are referred to as non-electrolytes.
Compounds such as sodium chloride and copper sulphate are known as ionic
compounds. They exist in the solid state. They are made up of oppositely charged
ions formed by the relevant atoms. You will be able to learn more about them in
grade 10.
Although, there are ions in solid ionic compounds they cannot move freely.
Hence, those compounds do not conduct electricity in the solid state. But, if an
ionic compound is dissolved in water to give an aqueous solution, the ions in it
become mobile. Thus, aqueous solutions of ionic compounds are good conductors
of electricity.
When an ionic solid is heated and brought to the liquid state, it is called a fused
substance. Ions in a fused liquid also can move. Accordingly, Ionic compounds
conduct electricity in the fused state.
10.2 Changes caused in a solution by an electric current
When electricity is conducted through an electrolyte, the conductors through which
the electric current enters the electrolyte and exits are called electrodes. In the
activity 10.1 above the electric current enters the solution by one carbon electrode
and exits from the solution through the other carbon electrode.
2
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
3
Let us engage in activity 10.2 to study the changes brought about in a solution by
an electric current.
Activity 10.2
You will need :- [A beaker, an ammeter,
+ -
connecting wires,
copper sulphate
solution, carbon
electrodes, two dry
cells (1.5 V)]
+
Positive
electrode
Method:-
² Set up apparatus as shown in the
figure 10.2 and pass electricity
through the copper sulphate solution.
² Note down your observations.
Figure 10.2
A
-
Negative
electrode
Carbon electrodes
Copper sulphate
solution
The electrode connected to the positive terminal of the external supply of electricity
is called the positive electrode. The electrode connected to the negative terminal
of the external supply of electricity is called the negative electrode. In the above
activity it can be observed the deposition of a reddish brown substance at the
negative electrode and the liberation of gas bubbles at the positive electrode. A
gradual decrease in the blue colour can also be observed in the solution. Hence, it
is clear that the compounds contained in the beaker undergo a chemical change.
This chemical change is caused by the electric current passed through the solution.
Here, copper is deposited on the negative electrode and oxygen gas is liberated at
the positive electrode. Copper sulphate undergoing the chemical change has turned
into copper, a simpler substance. The chemical change effected by passing an
electric current through an electrolyte is known as electrolysis. During this process,
the electrolyte is converted into more simpler components.
A substance that doesn't react chemically with the electrolyte referred as inert
electrodes. Carbon (graphite) and platinum electrodes are such examples.
Electrolysis of acidulated water
By activity 10.2, we learnt that in an electrolysis, an electrolyte is converted into
more simpler products. To explore more about this, let us find out the products of
the electrolysis of acidulated water. For this let us go ahead with activity 10.3.
2
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
3
Activity 10.3
You will need :- Distilled water with a few drops of a dilute sulphuric acid, a 9 V
battery, two carbon rods, a plastic container, connecting wires,
two test tubes.
O2
H2
Method:-
² Make two holes on the bottom of a
plastic container. Pass two carbon
rods through these holes and seal the
holes with a substance such as wax.
the
container and arrange the apparatus
as shown in Figure 10.3.
² Add acidulated water
into
² Observe well
² Record observations.
Test tubes
Plastic
container
Acidulated
water
Carbon
rods
(-)
(+)
+ -
9 V
Figure 10.3
In this activity, it can be observed that gas bubbles evolve at the electrodes. The
gases evolved get collected in the test tubes. The volume of the gas collected at the
negative electrode is approximately twice the volume of the gas collected at the
positive electrode.
It can be examined that hydrogen gas (H2) evolves at the negative electrode and
oxygen gas (O2) evolves at the positive electrode.
If the gas evolved at the positive electrode is collected and tested with a glowing
splint is put into it, the splint reignites. This verifies that the gas evolved at the
positive electrode is oxygen. Similarly, if the gas evolved at the negative electrode
is separated and a lighted splint is put into it, the gas burns with a squeaky "pop"
sound. This confirms that the gas evolved at the negative electrode is hydrogen.
Thus, during electrolysis, water is splitted into more simpler substances, hydrogen
and oxygen.
Applications of electrolysis
Electrolysis is frequently used in various industries.
² Extraction of various metals e.g. sodium, aluminum
²
² Electroplating
Industrial manufacture of caustic soda (sodium hydroxide)
Let us now study electroplating which is an application of electrolysis.
4
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
5
10.3 Electroplating
Recall the observations of activity 10.2. you would have observed the deposition of
copper on the negative electrode. By engaging in the activity 10.4, let us investigate
whether copper can be deposited on a certain object.
Activity 10.4
You will need :- Aqueous copper sulphate
solution, a clean copper
plate, a cleaned iron nail, a
beaker, connecting wires,
two dry cells of 1.5 V
Method :-
² Connect dry cells to the copper plate and
the iron nail as shown in figure 10.4 and dip
them at once in the copper sulphate solution.
² Record your observations.
+
-
Copper
sulphate
+
-
Figure 10.4
Iron nail
Copper
plate
In the activity 10.4, you can observe that the copper plate gradually dissolves and
copper is deposited on the iron nail. The plating of a certain metal on another surface
using electricity is referred to as electroplating.
For electroplating, the metal that needs to be plated should be used as the positive
electrode and the object that is plated should be used as the negative electrode.
Further, the electrolyte used needs to be a solution of a salt of the metal that should
be plated.
Assignment 10.1
1. Electroplating silver on an iron plate
2. Electroplating gold on a copper ring
Draw figures of suitable apparatus (as in figure 10.4) for no 1 and 2 instances
stating the positive electrode, negative electrode and the electrolyte in each case.
Take the iron nail you used in activity 10.4 to your hand and touch its plating with
your fingers. You will observe that the copper plating will get removed from the
nail and comes to your finger tips.
4
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
5
This shows that the plating occurred in this way is not in good quality.
Let us consider the characteristics of a high quality electroplating.
² The coating should firmly adhere to the surface subjected to plating.
² The coating should be of confirm thickness.
² The coating should be shiny.
Such a high quality plating occurs when the electrochemical change take place very
slowly. The electrolyte (salt solution) used for this has to be very dilute.
The chemical change occurring can also be slowed down by passing a very low
current through the solution. This can be effected by applying a low potential
difference.
In chemical industries, high quality electroplating is done by controlling the
conditions appropriately.
Plating of metals like nickel and chromium on iron trays is an example. This gives
a beautiful silver appearance to the tray.
Applications of electroplating
Pay your attention to vases, trays, cutlery and door locks offering a golden or silvery
lustre which are being used at home. Very often the luster of these objects is due to
a metal layer deposited on them. In order to prevent rusting of the parts of motor
vehicles, they are coated with a thin metallic layer by electroplating. Mostly metals
like copper (Cu), silver (Ag), gold (Au), nickel (Ni) and chromium (Cr) are plated
like this. In such instances, the metal plate has a certain property which is lacking in
the metal which is subjected to plating. Resistance to corrosion, attractive colour,
luster and good finish are some of such properties.
² Electroplating nickel metal on iron tray
protects it from rusting and also gives it
an attractive appearance.
² Electroplating a copper jewellery with
gold adds value to it and gives it a rich
look.
6
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
7
Figure 10.5 - Some copper jewellery
subjected to electroplating
Figure 10.6 - Some electroplated kitchen
equipment
Figure 10.7 - Some electroplated spare parts
Summary
² Liquids/ solutions which conduct electricity are called electrolytes.
² The reason for the electrical conductivity of electrolytes is the presence of
mobile ions in them.
² Liquids/solutions which do not conduct electricity are called non electrolytes.
They do not contain mobile ions.
² Though ionic compounds contain ions, they cannot move in the solid state.
Therefore, solid ionic compounds do not conduct electricity.
² Aqueous solutions and fused liquids of ionic compounds conduct electricity.
² The chemical changes taking place at the electrodes when an electric current
is passed through an electrolyte is referred to as electrolysis.
² During electrolysis, chemical compounds are splitted into more simpler
compounds or elements.
² By electrolyzing acidulated water, water can be turned into the elements,
hydrogen and oxygen.
² Coating one metal with another metal by passing an electric current is called
electroplating.
² When electroplating, always the metal that is subjected to plating should be
kept as the negative electrode.
² During electrolysis the metal that is plated is kept the anode while a solution
of a salt of that metal is used as the electrolyte.
² A high quality plating occurs when the chemical changes at the electrodes
occur very slowly.
² To obtain a high quality plating in chemical industry, conditions are
²
appropriately controlled.
In electroplating, it is expected that the metal that is plated possesses superior
qualities to that of the surface being plated.
6
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
7
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. What is the electrolyte, from the given liquids or solutions?
1. Distilled water
2. Sugar dissolved in distilled water
3. Sodium chloride dissolved in distilled water
4. Grease dissolved in kerosene
2. Petrol is not an electrical conductor because,
1. It does not contain mobile electrons 2. It does not contain mobile ions
3. Its density is very low
4. It is highly volatile
3. Select the correct statement, from the following statements.
1. Solid sodium chloride (NaCl) is an electrical conductor
2. Fused sodium chloride (NaCl) does not conduct electricity
3. An aqueous solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) conducts electricity
4. Solid sodium chloride (NaCl) consists of mobile ions.
4. Which of the following statement is correct about electroplating?
1. To make a high quality electroplating, the concentration of the electrolyte
must be high
2. To electroplate a copper ring with silver, the copper ring must be kept as
the positive electrode,
3. To electroplate a copper ring with silver, a copper salt must be taken as
the electrolyte
4. When electroplating a copper ring with silver, the positive electrode
erodes gradually
5. You are required to coat a silver bangle with gold. Which of the following
set of substances is most suitable for it?
1. A silver rod, a very dilute solution of a silver salt
2. A gold rod, a very dilute solution of a silver salt
3. A gold rod, a very dilute solution of a gold salt
4. A gold rod, a concentrated solution of a gold salt
6. Which of the following is not an observation of the electrolysis of a copper
sulphate solution?
1. Decaying of the positive electrode
2. Reducing the blue colour of the solution
3. Deposition of copper on the negative electrode
4. Liberation of gas bubbles at the positive electrode
8
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
9
(02) Give short answers.
1. Name three electrolytes.
2. Name three non-electrolytes.
3. Write three observations when electrolysis of a copper sulphate solution
occurs using inert electrodes.
4. Name the gases liberated at the positive and negative electrodes during
the electrolysis of acidulated water.
5. In addition to the liberation of gas bubbles at the electrodes, write an
observation that can be made during this electrolysis.
6. Write a simple test to identify the gas liberated at each electrode.
(03) The diagram shows an electrolytic cell used to electroplate a copper ring
with silver.
1. Name a metal that can be used as electrode
A.
2. What is the sign of the electrode A?
positive or negative?
3. Which solution of a salt of which metal
can be used as solution B which, is the
electrolyte?
B
A
4. What precautions can be taken to obtain a plating of high quality ?
Copper
ring
Technical Terms
Electrolysis
- úoHq;a úÉfþokh
Electrolyte
- úoHq;a úÉfþoHh
Non-electrolyte
- úoHq;a wúÉfþoHh
Positive electrode
- Ok bf,lafg%davh
Negative electrode
- RK bf,lafg%davh
Electroplating
Inert electrodes
- úoHq;a f,daydf,amkh
- wl%Sh bf,lafg%dav
- ªß£S¨¦
- ªß£Sö£õ¸Ò
- ªß£Põ¨ö£õ¸Ò
- ÷|ºªßÁõ´
- ©øÓªßÁõ´
- ªß •»õªhÀ
-
\hzxÁ ªßÁõ´
8
Science | Electrolysis
Science | Electrolysis
9
11
Density
11.1 Introduction to density
In a glass of drinking water, contains a small volume of water and the mass of it is
also small. In a well, there is a large volume of water and the mass of it is also large.
But, when a reservoir is considered, the volume of water it contains is massive and
the mass of it is also massive (figure 11.1).
(a) Glass of water
(b) Well
Figure 11.1
(c) Reservoir
Though the volume of a substance and its mass differs, there is a common relationship
between those two. Let us do the activity 11.1 to reveal this.
Activity 11. 1
You will need :- Measuring cylinders of varied capacities 100 ml, 250 ml and
500 ml, a 500 ml beaker, a triple
beam balance, water
Method :-
² Adjust the triple beam balance to its zero mark.
² Measure the mass of cleaned and dried 500 ml
empty beaker using this balance.
² Measure 100 ml of water into the beaker using
100 ml measuring cylinder.
² Measure the mass of beaker with water.
² Measure the mass of 250 ml and 500 ml of water
separately using the same beaker.
² Divide the mass of water by its volume and find
the ratio in each instance above.
Figure 11.2 (a) - A triple beam
balance
Figure 11.2 (b) - Measuring
mass by a triple beam balance
² Fill table 11.1 using the readings and calculations you obtained.
10
Science | Density
Science | Density
11
² What can be concluded according to the results obtained?
* Consider that 1 ml = 1 cm3
The mass of empty beaker =……………
Table 11.1
Volume of water
(cm3)
Mass of beaker
with water (g)
Mass of water
(g)
Mass of
water
Volume
(g cm-3)
According to the above activity, it is clear that the ratio of mass of water to its
volume is constant, though the volume taken differs. This constant value is specific
for water. And this value is known as the density.
Density =
Mass
Volume
Density can be explained as the ratio between mass and volume.
The density can be defined as follows.
The mass per unit volume of a substance is known as the density of that
substance.
Density, mass and volume are symbolized by ρ, m and v respectively.
The formula for density is ρ = m
v
11.2 Units of density
The measurements taken in activity 11.1 above, units of density can be deduced as
follows.
Density =
Mass
Volume
g
=
cm3
= g cm-3
10
Science | Density
Science | Density
11
But, according to the Standard International (SI) units, mass is measured in kg and
volume in m3. Thus;
Standard units (SI) of density =
SI unit of mass
SI unit of volume
kg
m3
= kg m-3
=
The Standard Units (SI) of density is kg m-3 (kilogram per cubic meter).
Now let us do the activity 11.2 to compare the densities of several substances.
Activity 11.2
You will need :- A measuring cylinder of 250 ml, a beaker of 250 ml, enough
water, coconut oil, kerosene, concentrated salt solution, a triple
beam balance
Method :-
² Clean and dry the beaker of 250 ml and measure the mass of it using the triple
beam balance
² Measure 250 ml of water by using the measuring cylinder of 250 ml. Then put
into the beaker. Measure the mass of beaker with water.
² Remove water and measure 250 ml of concentrated salt solution. Then, put
into the beaker. Measure the mass of beaker with salt solution.
² Same way, measure 250 ml of coconut oil and kerosene separately into the
same beaker and measure their masses.
² Note that the beaker and the measuring cylinder should be well cleaned and
dried before measuring coconut oil and kerosene.
² Tabulate your readings and work out the calculation as shown in the following
table 11.2.
Mass of the empty beaker = ..................
Table 11.2
Liquid/
Solution
Volume of
the liquid/
Solution - V
(cm3)
Mass of the
beaker with
liquid/Solution
(g)
Mass of
liquid - m
(g)
Volume (m)
Scale (v)
(g cm-3)
² What can be concluded according to the results obtained?
12
Science | Density
Science | Density
13
According to this activity, it can be seen that the ratio of mass to its volume is
different for different substances, though their volumes are equal.
Density of various substances differ from each other. It is a specific property of the
respective substance. Substances can be identified by the value of their density. This
is common for solids as well as for liquids. Therefore, density is a vital physical
quantity of a substance.
Let us study how to solve the problems regarding density.
Solved example 01:- Mass of 2m3 of water is 2000 kg. Calculate the density of
water.
Density =
Mass
Volume
2000 kg
2 m3
= 1000 kg m-3
=
Solved example 02:- The mass of a solution, which has the density of 800 kg m-3,
is 200 kg. What is the volume of it?
Density =
Volume =
Volume =
=
Mass
Volume
Mass
Density
200 kg
800 kg m-3
1
4
m3
= 0.25 m3
11.3 Hydrometers
If you want to find the density of a liquid, you can measure the volume and
mass of it and calculate the density, as you have done in activity 11.2. But it is
a time-consuming difficult process. Therefore, to measure the density of a liquid
easily, an equipment known as hydrometer is used.
Figure 11.3 shows several types of hydrometers. Hydrometer is made of a thin glass
tube, the lower part of which is blow to form a bulb. This bulb is filled with lead
shots, so that a part of the tube is submerged and float vertically in the liquid.
Science | Density
13
12
Science | Density
When a hydrometer is partially immersed and floating
in a liquid, the length of the immersed part depends on
the density of the liquid. It sinks less in high-density
liquids and more in low-density liquids. The upper
tubular part of the hydrometer is calibrated in such a
way that density can directly read by the depth it
immerse.
Figure 11.3 - Different types
of hydrometers
Liquid A
It is shown that the same hydrometer is made
to float in three different liquids in figure
11.4. Figure 11.4 (b) shows how it floats in
water. Immersed height of the hydrometer is less in liquid A, than in water (figure
11.4 (b)). It indicates that density of liquid A is higher than that of water. Immersed
length of the hydrometer is more in liquid C than in water (figure 11.4 (c)). So, the
density of liquid C is lower than that of water.
Figure 11.4
Liquid C
(b)
(a)
(c)
Water
For extra knowledge
The density of the salty water of the dead
sea located in between Israel and Jordan
is very high. It has the ability of floating a
man without sinking.
Let us do activity 11.3 by using a hydrometer to know the density of some common
liquids.
14
Science | Density
Science | Density
15
Activity 11.3
You will need :- Three tall vessels,
(measuring cylinders
or
of
plastic bottles), water,
kerosene, coconut oil,
hydrometer
lower
part
Method :-
² Put water, kerosene and coconut
oil in to three vessels.
² Dip hydrometer in each liquid and
take down the reading of density
(clean the hydrometer before you
put it into each liquid).
² Compare your valves with the
table 11.3.
Table 11.3
Liquid
Mercury
Glycerin
Milk
Sea water
Water
Olive oil
Coconut oil
Turpentine
Petrol
Liquor
Kerosene
Density
(kg m-3)
13600
1262
1030
1025
1000
920
900
870
800
791
790
A simple hydrometer can easily be made by you using a drinking straw. Engage in
the activity 11.4.
Activity 11.4
You will need :- A drinking straw, a candle, several iron balls of the diameter of
3 mm, a measuring cylinder, 250 ml of coconut oil, 250 ml of
concentrated salt solution and water.
Method :-
² Heat one end of the drinking straw in the candle flame to seal it.
² Add enough water into the density jar or the measuring cylinder.
² Put iron balls into the straw so that it floats vertically while 2/3 of its length is
immersed in water.
² Mark the floating level on the straw, while it is in water. Now you have finished
making the hydrometer.
² Add salt water into the measuring cylinder and float the hydrometer in it.
Mark the level of floating on the hydrometer.
² Repeat the above step using coconut oil as the liquid.
² Decide whether the density of the liquids used is higher or lower than that of
water, according to the levels of floating.
14
Science | Density
Science | Density
15
Use of hydrometers
Cow's milk contains approximately 90% of water. Other than water, it contains
lipids, protein etc. Because of the contribution of the density of other constituents,
density of milk is slightly higher than that of water. Amount of water in milk can be
determined by measuring the density of it, using a hydrometer. This measurement
can be used to decide whether water is added to milk. Hydrometers which are
specially made to measure the density of milk are known as lactometers.
Hydrometers are also used to measure the percentage of alcohol in alcoholic drinks,
like wine and beer. Those are known as alcoholmeters. These alcoholic drinks also
contain high percentage of water. Therefore, the density of alcoholic drinks are
slightly different from density of water.
The density of the acid, changes according to the changes in lead-acid batteries used
in vehicles. Therefore, the condition of batteries can be examined by measuring the
density with a hydrometer.
Soil hydrometer is used in determining composition of a soil sample. It can be
concluded by dissolving a constant mass of soil, in a constant volume of water to
calculate the density of soil solution.
Sea water contain high amount of salt dissolved in it. There is a special hydrometer
called seawater hydrometer, used to measure the density of sea water. Due to high
concentration of salts, the density of sea water is higher than normal fresh water.
Composition of Rubber is also measured by special hydrometer known as metrolac.
Summary
² Density of a substance is the mass per unit volume of that substance.
²
Mass
Density =
Volume
² The standard unit of density is kilogram per cubic-meters (kg m -3).
² Density is a vital, physical property of a substance. It differs from substance
to substance.
² Hydrometer is used to measure the density of liquid.
² Density is a criteria to determine quality of liquids and solutions.
16
Science | Density
Science | Density
17
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. International unit (SI) of density is,
(1) g ml-1 (2) g cm-3 (3) kg m-3
(4) kg m-2
2. Four different liquids have equal masses of 8000 kg each. The volumes of them
are given below.
A. Liquid - 12 m3
C. Liquid - 8 m3
The liquid that has the highest density is;
B. Liquid - 10 m3
D. Liquid - 6 m3
(1) A
(2) B (3) C
(4) D
3. Consider the following statements on the density of a liquid.
a. Density of a liquid depends on its mass.
b. Density of a liquid depends on its volume.
c. Density of a liquid depends on the kind of liquid.
The true statement/s out of those is/are,
(1) a and b only
(3) c only
(2) b and c only
(4) All a, b and c
4. Four different liquids have equal volumes of 0.5 m3 each. The masses of these
liquids are given below.
Liquid P - 400 kg
Liquid R - 550 kg
Liquid Q - 500 kg
Liquid S - 600 kg
The liquid that has the lowest density is,
(1) P
(2) Q (3) R
(4) S
5. Figure given below shows four liquids, that have equal masses, kept in equal
containers.
Select the correct answer, which illustrate the ascending order of densities of
four liquids.
(1) K < L < M < N
(3) N < L < M < K
(2) K < M < L < N
(4) N < M < L < K
16
Science | Density
Science | Density
17
6. Figure below shows four equal hydrometers floating in four types of liquids.
T
U
V
W
Out of those, the liquid that has the highest density is,
(1) T
(2) U
(3) V
(4) W
(02) Observation received, while preparing an orange solution is given below.
Orange seeds which were at the bottom of glass, started floating when
adding sugar.
Give reasons for this observation.
(03) Calculate the density of 4 m3 volume of liquid with 3600 kg mass.
(04) Density of a solution is 2000 kg m-3. Calculate the mass of 0.25 m3 volume,
of this solution.
Technical Terms
Density
Hydrometer
Lactometer
Alcoholmeter
Liquid
Solution
- >k;ajh
- øjudkh
- laISrudkh
- uoHidrudkh
- øjh
- ødjKh
- Ahºzv
- }µ©õÛ
- £õÀ©õÛ
- ©x\õµ}µ©õÛ
- vµÁ®
- Pøµ\À
18
Science | Density
Science | Density
PB
12
Bio-diversity
12.1 Introduction to bio-diversity
Recall the field visits you attended to study about the environment. During those
field visits you would have experienced different types of environments. They can
be beaches, mangrove environments, forests, monsoon forests and grasslands. A
system that includes all living organisms (biotic factors) in an area as well as its
physical environment (abiotic factors) interacting with one another as a unit is
known as an ecosystem. Study the ecosystems in figure 12.1.
A forest
A mangrove environment
A grassland
A beach
Figure 12.1 - Some ecosystems
When different ecosystems are considered, the animals and plants in these systems are
varied. The physical environment and climatic factors of those ecosystems are also
different. The diversity among these ecosystems is known as ecosystem diversity.
Think about the living organisms in ecosystems. In ecosystems there are many
species of animals and plants as well as many species of micro-organisms. With
regard to these species, there is a great variety of characteristics in the body shape,
size, nutritional patterns and reproduction. The diversity among the species is
known as species diversity.
PB
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
19
Bacterium (enlarged)
Grass
Coconut tree
Ulva
Snail
Figure 12.2 - Some species of living organisms
Parrot
Let us do the assignment 12.1 to identify the diversity of plants and animals in an
ecosystem.
Assignment 12.1
Select a plot of land in your area or school (thicket, grassland, pond). Study the
species diversity in the selected plot of land. Using your observations fill in the
table given.
Table 12.1
Plant species Animal species Micro-organisms
Living organisms are categorized as plants, animals and micro-organisms.
(In this field visit you should follow your teacher’s advice, without harming the environment and
ensure your safety.)
Are there any differences in living organisms of a same species? Let us do the
activity 12.1 to find about it.
20
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
21
Activity 12.1
² Observe the external features (given within the table) of all your classmates
and fill in the table 12.2.
Table 12.2
Feature
Number of students
1&
a) have the ability to roll the tongue
b) no ability to roll the tongue
2& a) with free ear lobes
b) with attached ear lobes
3&
a) with black eyes
b) with brown eyes
4& a) with straight hair
b) with curly hair
5&
a) right handed
b) left handed
Modern man belongs to the species
Homo sapiens sapiens. Through
the above activity you would have
understood that even within the same
species there are differences among
the individuals.
You can understand the differences
among the human by figure 12.3.
The reason for these differences of a
certain species is genetic diversity.
You will learn about genes in grade
10 & 11.
For extra knowledge
Figure 12.3 - Humans of Homo sapiens sapiens with
different features
You already know that living organisms are made up of cells. Chromosomes
are located in nucleus of these cells. Genes are located on these chromosomes.
The features of living organisms are controlled by genes. Genetic diversity is
the cause for the differences among organisms within the same species.
20
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
21
There is a diversity among the ecosystems that organisms live and there is a diversity
among the living species. Not only that, there is a diversity among the organisms
of a same species. Bio-diversity is a combination of ecosystem diversity, species
diversity and genetic diversity.
12.2 Importance of bio-diversity
Both large and small creatures in an ecosystem play a significant role in maintaining
the equilibrium of the certain ecosystem. Higher bio-diversity in an ecosystem also
increases the wellbeing and the stability of that ecosystem.
The beauty of the environment increases due to bio-diversity. We know that Sri
Lanka is a country with a rich bio-diversity. Sri Lanka has been named as the country
with the highest density of flowering plants, reptiles, amphibians, and mammals in
the Asian region. Rich bio-diversity is a strong reason for tourist attraction.
Bio-diversity has reduced the competition between the species. Organisms are
always in a competition for their needs. When considering the plant world, they are
competing for the needs that should be used from the environment such as light,
space, water and air. When considering the animal world, animals are competing for
requirements such as habitat, food, security and choice of partners. Bio-diversity
helps to minimize this competition among living organisms.
Let us see how bio-diversity acts, trees to minimize the competition for water. The
roots of different trees are adapted to take water from different levels in the soil
(figure 12.4).
Deeply rooted
plants
Plants with roots on the surface of the Earth
A plant with roots that can absorb
water from the atmosphere
Figure 12.4 - Roots adapted to minimize the competition for water
We know that the beaks of different bird species are of different shapes. This is
important to reduce the competition for food. Various birds depend on various
foods and their beaks are shaped according to their diet (figure 12.5).
22
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
23
Hummingbird
Duck
Hawk
Parrot
Figure 12.5 - Diversity of beaks among birds
“The wild types” of most plants and animals used in agriculture are found in natural
ecosystems. Genes that are resistant to pests, adverse environmental conditions and
illnesses, are available in these “wild types”. Because of bio-diversity it is possible
to use this genetic materials in a favourable manner in agriculture.
Due to bio-diversity some species are endemic to each region. Species that can be
seen only in one geographical region or country are known as endemic species.
Humans conserve these endemic species due to this rich bio-diversity.
Jungle fowl
'Rilava'/'Mandi'
'Bandula pethiya'
Blue magpie
Green pit viper
'Ashoka pethiya'
Figure 12.6 - Some species endemic to Sri Lanka
This bio-diversity helps to protect the water resources and soil to maintain favourable
climatic conditions and minimize environmental pollution. Bio-diversity is very
important for entertainment, various research works and educational activities.
12.3 Threats to bio-diversity
There are many threats for bio-diversity. These threats have caused deterioration
in bio-diversity. The reasons for biodegradation can be discussed under two topics.
22
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
23
Natural reasons
Since ancient times, bio-diversity has been affected by the impact of various natural
activities. Collapsing meteors, volcanic explosions, tsunami, earth slides and floods
are some of these natural reasons.
e.g. It is considered that a meteor collapse caused for the extinction of dinosaurs.
There is an argument that natural global warming was the reason for the
extinction of mammoth.
Mammoth
Figure 12.7 - Some extinct animals
Dinosaurs
Human activities
With the rapid increase in the human population, forests are destroyed extensively
to meet their needs. Rapid deforestation destruct the habitats of living organisms.
Also the construction of various buildings, streets and reservoirs splits the habitats
of living organisms.
The increase in human population causes many environmental issues. Over use of
resources and addition of pollutants to the environment are often caused by human
activities. Soil, aquatic and airy ecosystems get so polluted and these ecosystems
become unsuitable for survival of organisms. These reasons have a strong impact
on bio-diversity.
Spreading of invasive organisms in an ecosystem too, make a strong impact on its
bio-diversity (figure 12.8).
'Gandapana'/'Napunni'
Parthenium
24
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
25
Tank cleaner fish
'Mannawa' fish
Figure 12.8 - Some species of invasive organisms
The introduction of genetically modified new organisms into the environment
cause adverse impact on bio-diversity. Although, it is not yet possible to specify
this, these organisms can be considered as a threat to bio-diversity in the future.
Climatic changes due to environmental problems such as ozone layer depletion and
global warming will affect the bio-diversity.
These threats have caused bio-diversity degradation worldwide. Hence, some
species of organisms are in a threat of extinction from the Earth. Therefore,
bio-diversity should be conserved. The regions of higher density of living organisms
are called hotspots. To be considered as a bio-diversity hotspot, a country or a
region should be rich with high proportion of indigenous species and species with
more threats. As Sri Lanka belongs to a hotspot region, it is our duty to contribute
for the conservation of bio-diversity.
Assignment 12.2
Following are some threats for bio-diversity. Collect information on each topic
and prepare an article for a newspaper.
Increase of human population
Introduction of invasive organisms
”
” Destruction of forests
”
” Environmental pollution
” Overuse of resources in the environment
” Depletion of ozone layer and climatic changes
24
Science | Bio-diversity
12.4 Important features of ecosystems
Do the assignment 12.3 to get an idea about the living organisms and non-living
organisms in an environment.
Assignment 12.3
” Select a plot of land in your school garden. Now draw separately the pictures
of plants, animals and non-living components in that plot of land in 3
transparent sheets.
” Keep the 3 transparent sheets overlapping
Science | Bio-diversity
25
Figure 12.8 shows some pictures of a similar assignment carried out around a pond.
Nonliving components
Plants
Animals
Overlapped figure
Figure 12.9
You will understand that the environment contains living organisms (animals and
plants) and non-living components.
All living organisms in a community and the physical environment interacting
with them considered together as an ecosystem.
e.g. :- A pond, a forest, decaying log, coral reef environment, a grassland
Features of an ecosystem
1. Interaction occur between living components as well as between non-living
components.
Living - living relationships, Living - non living relationships,
Non living - non living relationships
2. The energy flows through one way stream
The solar energy which is used by green plants in photosynthesis, is stored in
the food produced during this process. The energy flows from lower consumer
levels to the higher consumer levels through food chains or food webs.
3. Recycling of materials
The materials that the organisms receive from the environment continue to be
back to the environment. The continuous exchange of materials between the
organisms and the environment is an important feature of an ecosystem.
4. An independent Unit
Since there are constant interactions within the ecosystem it has ensured the
existence in biosphere.
26
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
27
Let us see living - living relationships in an environment.
Living - living relationships
The interactions between the living organisms are known as living-living
relationships. These interactions are to meet the following needs.
² Food
² Security
² Reproduction
Following are some such interactions.
² Animals consuming plants as food
² Some predators consuming other animals
² Certain micro-organisms depending on other living organisms
² Some animals use trees as their habitat
² Animals hiding among plants for protection
² Some plants use animals to spread their species
² Some plants fulfill their nitrogenous requirements from insects
(insectivorous plants)
² Producing new creatures through reproduction for the continuous existence of
life
Figure 12.10 - Living-living relationships
Living - non living relationships
The interactions between the living organisms and non-living components are
known living-non living relationships. The organisms interact with their habitat to
get non-living components such as water, air and light.
e.g.
The plants use solar energy for photosynthesis
Plants absorb water from soil
Plants and animals use atmospheric oxygen for respiration
Plants use atmospheric carbon dioxide for photosynthesis
Plants release oxygen to the atmosphere as a result of photosynthesis
26
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
27
Oxygen
Sun
Carbon dioxide
Light
energy
p
y ll
h
Food
h l o r o
C
Water
Figure 12.11 - Photosynthesis
The living creatures are also adjusted to match the specific environmental conditions
of their habitats. This is known as adaptation.
e.g. Adaptations of plants to minimize transpiration in dry environment
Non living - non living relationships
The interactions between non living components are known as non living - non
living relationships.
e.g.
”
”
Soil erosion by water
Rock weathering due to water and solar heat
Figure 12.12 - An environment subjected to soil erosion
28
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
29
Activity 12.2
² Name the plants, animals and non-living components that can be seen in the
given plot of land.
² Write sentences about the interactions that exist between the living organisms
and living-non living and non living materials.
e.g. Plants absorb solar energy for photosynthesis
Figure 12.13
12.5 Natural ecosystems and built environment
Sri Lanka is a country with a rich bio-diversity. Various ecosystems are found due
to the location of Sri Lanka as an island and the location of the central hill country.
The location of different ecosystems is a major cause for a higher bio-diversity.
A sketch of the ecosystem classification in Sri Lanka is given below.
Ecosystems in Sri Lanka
Natural ecosystems
Man-made ecosystems
Natural aquatic
environments
Natural terrestrial
environments
Fresh water
Marine
Brackish water
Forests
Grasslands
Agricultural
ecosystems
Industrial
ecosystems
Human
settlements
Science | Bio-diversity
29
28
Science | Bio-diversity
Natural aquatic environments
Natural aquatic environments can be categorized into three groups as fresh water,
marine ecosystems and brackish water environments. A vast number of living
organisms live in these environments. Information about some aquatic ecosystems
are given below.
Rivers
² They are fresh water aquatic ecosystems.
² Most rivers start from the catchment
areas of the central highlands and flow
to the sea.
² The water level of rivers fluctuate with
the rainfall in the regions.
² Some rivers confine to a small stream
during the dry season.
Figure 12.14 - A river
² Different species of plants and animals are living from the head wall ('Ismaththa')
up to the estuary.
e.g. 'Mahaweli' river, 'Kelani' river
Importance
² Fulfill the water needs for agriculture
² Generating hydro power
² For transportation
Estuary
² A place where a river falls to the sea is
known as an estuary.
² As marine water and fresh water are
mixed at estuary, water becomes
brackish.
² Various organisms live in brackish
water.
Figure 12.15 - A river mouth
² The deposition of mud and sand in
river water cause triangular islands known as a Delta.
e.g. Estuary of 'Mahaweli' – opens to 'Koddiyar' Bay and 'Thambalagam' Bay
Importance
² Prevents the mixing of marine water and fresh water
² Abundance of fish species with economic importance
² Rich in bio-diversity
30
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
31
Lagoon
² A lagoon is a shallow body of brackish
water permanently separated from the sea
by barriers of sand or reefs, but connected
with the sea at one time during the year.
e.g. Negombo lagoon, Batticaloa lagoon,
Puttalam lagoon
Importance
² Used for fishing purposes because prawns, crabs, oysters are available in these
Figure 12.16 - Lagoon
places
² The mangrove plants common on lagoons prevent sea erosion.
² A place of tourist attraction
Riverine environment
² The environment on either sides of the river
from starting point of the river to the point
where it flows to the sea is known as the
riverine environment.
² Flood plains, sandy lands, marshy lands
belong to this environment.
² 'Villu' is a wet land in riverine environment.
² Due to over flow of a river during the rainy
season flood plains are created.
e.g. 'Mahaweli' flood plain at East
Importance
Figure 12.17 - River side environment
² Used for inland fishing industry
² The soil is very fertile in flood plains as silt flowing along the river is deposited
in these areas. So, this soil is used for agriculture as well as for tile and brick
industry.
Inland water reservoirs
² Naturally formed lakes and ponds belong
to inland water reservoirs. Man-made tanks
are also considered inland water reservoirs.
They can be seen in both wet zone and dry
zone and are fresh water environments.
Figure 12.18 - Inland water reservoirs
² Plants such as Lotus, Lilly, 'Kekatiya'/'Kotti' and animals such as fish, frogs,
snakes, otters and aquatic birds can be seen in this environment
e.g. 'Parakrama samudraya', 'Kala wewa'
Science | Bio-diversity
31
30
Science | Bio-diversity
Importance
² Used for inland fishery industry
² Provides water for agriculture
Ocean
² Marine areas that covers most of the
Earth’s surface is known as ocean.
² A large living community such as
algae, polyps, oysters and fish live in
the oceans.
e.g. - Indian ocean, Atlantic ocean
Importance
² Rich bio-diversity
² Ocean water is used to produce salt
² For fishing industry
² Generates electricity by ocean waves
² A place of tourist attraction
Wet lands
² Marshy lands that are covered with
water during a long period of time in
the year are known as wet lands.
² There are fresh water wet lands, marine
wet lands and man-made wet lands.
e.g. - Anawilundawa, Muthurajawela
Figure 12.19 - Ocean
Importance
² Wet lands are important to control flood, maintain the stability of reservoirs,
minimize climatic changes, make ground water nutritious and maintain the bio-
diversity.
Figure 12.20 - A wet land
² Used for different industries and tourism industry
Assignment 12.4
” Arrange a field trip to visit a natural water resource in Sri Lanka.
” Study the bio-diversity in the particular environment.
” Make a booklet about the living species you observed and their special
features.
32
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
33
Natural terrestrial environments
A vast bio-diversity can be observed in natural terrestrial environments in Sri Lanka.
Some information about diversity in some terrestrial environments are given below.
Forests
Tropical rain forests (Tropical lowland
rain forests/ Wet evergreen forests)
² There is a warm-wet climate with a rainfall
throughout the year.
² Receives over 2000 mm of annual rainfall
² Mineral are cycling
² Located in areas with an elevation up to 900 m
² The trees with a higher economic value such as 'Hora'/'Ennai', 'Keena'/'Punnai',
'Milla'/'Kattamanakku', 'Halmilla'/'Chavandalai' and Teak are common in these
forests.
Figure 12.21 - Tropical rain forests
² Vegetation reach about 40 m of height and grow densely.
² A canopy structure can be seen. Epiphytes and climbers are common on trees.
e.g. 'Sinharaja', 'Kanneliya', 'Dediyagala', 'Nakiadeniya' forests
Importance
² Endemic plants and animal species are very common
² Can be considered as a special environment that protects the water resources of
a country
² Acts as a catchment area
Montane forests
² Located in areas above 900 m from the sea level
² Annual rainfall is about 4000 mm.
² As there is heavy wind the trees are stunted. Also
they are with twisted stems and smaller leaves. The
tops of the trees have become flat.
² Plant species such as 'Walsapu',' Veralu'/'Veralikkai',
'Mihiriya', 'Dan'/'Kirampu', 'Keena' and animal
species such as monkeys, loris, giant squirrel, stag
can be seen.
e.g. 'Haggala', upper part of Knuckles
Figure 12.22 - Montane forests
Importance
² Endemic plant and animal species are common
² Act as catchment areas and protects many water sources
² Minimize soil erosion
32
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
33
Dry-mixed evergreen forests /
Monsoon forests
² Can be seen in dry zone but not much arid
² Annual rain fall is about 1200 mm-1900 mm
² May to September is a long drought season
² Evergreen and deciduous plants are present
e.g. Wasgamuwa, Yala, Willpaththu
Figure 12.23 - Monsoon forests
Importance
² A lot of economically valuable plants such as 'Palu'/'Pasippayaru',
'Burutha'/'Mutirai', 'Weera'/'Veerai', 'Koan'/'Kula', Ebony,
'Welang'/'Taddaemarum', 'Kolong'/'Manchal-kadampa', 'Kalumadiriya',
'Halmilla', Neem are common.
² Also animals such as deer, monkeys, leopards, bears, giant squirrel and elephants
can be seen in these forests.
² Act as catchment areas for reservoirs in dry zone
Thorn bushes and scrublands
² Annual rain fall is over 1250 mm and
temperature is high over 34 0C
² Considered as semi xeric areas.
² There are many adaptations in trees
the arid environmental
to withstand
conditions.
² Some of the adaptations are having
Figure 12.24 - Thorn bushes and scrublands
smaller leaves, fleshy leaves, ability to store water in the stem and thorny bushes.
² 'Nawahandi'/'Kally', Cactus, 'Daluk'/'Sadurakkalli', 'Kaneru'/'Alari', 'Eraminiya',
'Andara'/'Vidaththal', Aloe are some of the trees that can be seen in these
forests.
e.g. Hambanthota District, Puttalam District, Killinochchi District
Grasslands
Given below are some information about
the grasslands in different climatic zones of
Sri Lanka.
'Wet patana'
² Located in areas of over 2000 m altitude.
There is heavy rainfall in these areas.
² Normally located near forests. In addition
Figure 12.25 - 'Wet patana'
to grass there are also trees grown alone. 'Maharathmal' plant is prominent among
them. 'Usnia' lichens grow on these trees. The fern 'Pteridium' also can be seen
in these grasslands.
e.g. Horton plains, 'Bopaththalawa', 'Bagawanthalawa'
Science | Bio-diversity
34
Science | Bio-diversity
35
'Dry patana'
² Widely spread than wet Patana.
² The grass
'Mana'/'Narippul'
common.
is very
² Apart from small forests in the valley and
hills, other areas are covered with grass
only.
² Usually grass is burnt during the drought
season. Soil gets eroded during the rainy
seasons.
e.g. 'Rakwana', 'Uva Basin'
'Damana'
² This is a type of grassland in the abandoned
chena cultivation ('Hena') areas in the low
country dry zone.
² Grasses such as 'Mana', 'Illuk'/'Tharppaipul',
'Bata' and trees such as wood apple, 'Palu',
'Myla'/'Aththi', 'Madan'/'Perunaval' are
common in these areas.
Figure 12.26 - 'Dry patana'
² This is the most preferred area of the
Figure 12.27 - 'Damana'
elephants.
e.g. 'Wilpaththu', 'Maduru oya', 'Walikanda'
'Talawa'
² A type of a grassland formed as a result of
chena cultivation in low country wet zone.
'Kalutara' District,
e.g. Located
in
'Haldummulla', 'Matara' District
Let us engage in assignment 12.5 to study natural ecosystems in Sri Lanka.
Figure 12.28 - 'Talawa'
34
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
35
Assignment 12.5
Following is a map that depicts the natural ecosystems in Sri Lanka. Study the
map well and identify the ecosystems and their locations.
Palk Strait
Jaffna
Gulf of Mannar
Mannar
Bay of Bengal
Kilinochchi
Mullaitivu
Tropical thorn forests
Dry evergreen forests
Wet deciduous forests
Wet semi-evergreen forests
Semi – evergreen rain forests
Tropical savanna forests
Tropical rain forests evergreen forests
Sub montane evergreen forests
Vavuniya
Anuradhapura
Trincomalee
Montane temperate forests
Grasslands
}
A - Dry 'Patana' grasslands
B - Wet 'Patana' grasslands
C - Damana 'Patana' grasslands
Puttalam
Indian
Ocean
Polonnaruwa
Batticaloa
Mangroves
Area without forests
Kurunegala
Kegalle
Matale
Kandy
Ampara
Gampaha
Colombo
Ratnapura
Kalutara
Nuwara Eliya Badulla
Monaragala
Galle
Matara
Hambantota
Indian Ocean
Figure 12.29 - Natural ecosystems in Sri Lanka
Source - The National Map Collection of Sri Lanka, School Edition, Survey Department
36
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
37
Man-made ecosystems in Sri Lanka
The man-made ecosystems in Sri Lanka can be categorized into 3 groups.
² Agricultural environments
²
Industrial environments
² Settlement environments
Agricultural environments
² An ecosystem designed for cultivation
of crops and animal husbandry to
meet the food requirement is called an
agricultural environment.
² Occasions where humans have taken
into their control of certain plants and
animals that were distributed in natural
environment are found in agricultural environments.
Figure 12.30 - Agricultural environment
² For the cultivation of paddy, tea, vegetables particular land preparations should
be carried out. Also lands must be allocated for animal husbandry. In this case
when the grasslands are regularly grazed, the plants do not exist. Hence the bio-
diversity is limited.
Assignment 12.6
” Compare and tabulate the differences between a natural environment and an
agricultural environment.
Industrial environments
² An ecosystem that has been built up
by machines, raw materials and energy
resources required for a product is called
an industrial environment.
² When a community is being developed
many productions
(food, medicine,
clothes, furniture, electrical equipment,
sanitary materials) are produced, by many industries for betterment of living
conditions of the citizens in a certain country.
Figure 12.31 - A factory
² Even though these industrial products are useful to human they also have adverse
effects.
Science | Bio-diversity
37
36
Science | Bio-diversity
Some of the adverse effects are,
² Heavy noise in the industrial environment
² Releasing poisonous gases and smokes
² Release of excessive heat and contamination of water bodies
² Harmful chemicals, released to the environment
Settlement environments
² A rural or urban environment where
man has established his habitat is
known as settlement environments.
² Migration to cities on a variety of
needs and urbanization in cities have
resulted more urban settlements.
² Many problems have arisen due to
improper human settlements.
Figure 12.32 - A habitat
² Reduce the space
² Not enough light
² Less ventilation
² Diseases become to epidemic situation
²
² Difficulty in removing household garbage
² Damages from emergency fires
² Flooding
² Cultural and social issues
Insufficient sanitary facilities
Assignment 12.7
” Man-made environments should be set up to ensure optimum utilization so
as to minimize the damage to the natural environment. List the strategies you
propose.
38
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
39
Summary
² Combination of plants, animals, micro-organisms, genetic materials of all
these living organisms and the ecosystems is known as bio-diversity.
² There are various threats for bio-diversity. These threats have led to
deterioration in bio-diversity.
² The living organisms as well as non-living components in an ecosystem
often interact with each other. These interactions are living-living,
living-non living and non living-non living.
² Fresh water environments, marine environments and brackish water
environments are the natural aquatic environments that can be seen in
Sri Lanka. Rivers, estuaries, lagoons, riverine environments, man made
inland water bodies and oceans belong to these environments.
² The natural terrestrial environments in Sri Lanka can be grouped as forests
and grasslands.
² There are four types of forests in Sri Lanka. They are tropical rainforests,
montane forests, tropical dry mixed evergreen forests and tropical thorn
forests.
² Wet 'Patana', dry 'Patana', 'Damana' and 'Talawa' are the types of grasslands
in Sri Lanka.
² The man-made ecosystems are agricultural environments, industrial
environments and settlement environments.
It is our responsibility to protect the bio-diversity.
²
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
01. Select the correct statement about bio-diversity.
1. Bio-diversity is the diversity of all the living beings in the environment.
2. Bio-diversity is the diversity of plants, animals and the micro-organisms in
the environment.
3. Bio-diversity is the diversity of plants, animals, micro-organisms in the
environment and their genetic materials.
4. Bio-diversity is the combination of plants, animals, micro-organisms, their
genetic materials and the ecosystem.
38
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
39
2. Which out of the following is not a threat for bio-diversity?
1) Environmental pollution
3) Increasing human population
2) Spread of invasive species
4) Study of biodiversity
3. Select the correct statement regarding bio-diversity.
a - High bio-diversity will increase the well-being and stability of an
ecosystem.
b - Bio-diversity has reduced the competition for the needs of living species.
c - Man has focused to conserve endemic species due to rich biodiversity.
1) a and b
2) a and c
3) b and c
4) a, b and c
4. Which of the following can be considered as a man-made environment?
1) Montane forests
2) Ponds
3) Agricultural lands
4) Wet Patana
5. Consider the following statements about an ecosystem.
It is an independent unit.
a -
b - Energy flows in one direction and materials are recycled
c - There are interactions between living-living and also living-non living.
The correct statements are,
2) a and c
1) a and b
3) b and c
4) a, b and c
(02) Match the features of column A with the relevant ecosystem in column B.
A
B
With smaller leaves and twisted stems
tropical rain forests
Canopy structure can be seen
'Palu', 'Weera', 'Koan' are abundant
'Maharathmal' plant is prominent
wet 'Patana'
montane forests
monsoon forests
40
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
41
(03) From ancient times man-made environmental systems have been
created in addition to the existing natural ecosystems.
1. Name two important features of a natural ecosystem.
2. What are the man-made ecosystems that exist in Sri Lanka?
3. Write two common issues in a man-made ecosystem.
4. Write an example for a man-made ecosystem.
5. Given below is a picture of a man-made ecosystem. Suggest two possible
issues and remedies in the given ecosystem.
Technical Terms
Bio-diversity
Ecosystem
Natural ecosystem
Man-made ecosystem
Ecosystem diversity
Genetic diversity
Species diversity
Biotic factors
Abiotic factors
Agricultural environments
Industrial environments
Settlement environments
- ffcj úúO;ajh
- mßir moaO;sh
- iajdNdúl mßir moaO;sh
- E°º¨ £ÀÁøPø©
- `ÇØöÓõSv
- C¯ØøPa `ÇØöÓõSv
- {¸©õoUP¨£mh `ÇØöÓõSv
- ks¾ñ; mßir moaO;sh
- mßir moaO;sj, úúO;ajh - `ÇØöÓõSv¨ £ÀÁøPø©
- £µ®£øµ¯»S¨ £ÀÁøPø©
- cdk úúO;ajh
- CÚ¨ £ÀÁøPø©
- úfYaI úúO;ajh
- E°›¯À Põµo
- ffcj idOl
- E°µØÓ Põµo
- wffcj idOl
- ÂÁ\õ¯a `ÇÀ
- lDIsld¾ñl mßir
- øPzöuõÈÀ `ÇÀ
- ld¾ñl mßir
- Si°¸¨¦a `ÇÀ
- ckdjdi mßir
40
Science | Bio-diversity
Science | Bio-diversity
41
13
Artificial Environment
and Green Concept
13.1 Artificial environment and green concept
Pay your attention to figure 13.1 which indicates built environments you have learnt
in the chapter Bio-diversity.
Agricultural environment
Industrial environment
Figure 13.1
Urban environment
From the date of the origin of Earth, everything in it has been formed naturally.
However with the advent of man on Earth and passage of time thereafter, an
artificial environment or a built environment was taken place on the natural
environment because of the man who changed the natural environment according
to his requirements. Therefore, agricultural, industrial and urban environments are
artificial environments made by man.
Assignment 13.1
² Figure 13.2
indicates how
the
area around Manhattan metropolis
of New York in United State of
America appeared in the past and is
seen at present.
² List favourable and unfavourable
two
between
these
features
environments.
Then
Today
Figure 13.2 - Town Manhattan
Instead of the Earth covered with green colour in the past, what is left today is
an artificial environment crammed with settlements, factories and cultivated
lands. Because of this, at present the humans all over the world are facing unsolve
problems. Along with the advancement of science and technology of the human
who is considered as the dominant living being on Earth, his/her life span too
42
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
43
has increased. Meanwhile, with the increase in human population and unlimited
exploitation of limited resources on Earth, all organisms have confronted with
many problems. Increase in global warming due to human activities has either
directly or indirectly become the reason for all environmental problems.
At present, human attention has been drawn to follow guidelines and policies
essential for maintaining goods and services without damaging the natural
environment or causing minimal damage to the natural environment on the Earth.
This has come to limelight as the green concept.
Green concept means, following guidelines and policies essential for maintaining
goods and services so that the natural environment on Earth is minimally harmed
or not harmed at all.
To get a better understanding about the green concept, let us find out information
on several places in the world which adopt the green concept.
German Parliamentary building
Energy for this building is obtained
from solar energy, geothermal energy
and bio-fuel power houses. In addition,
it has special ventilating devices and
contrivances to retain warmth. 80% of the
total electricity requirement is produced
within the building itself. Because of
such devices, it has reduced the annual
emission of carbon dioxide from 7 000
tons to 1 000 tons (figure 13.3).
Figure 13.3 - German Parliamentary building
Figure 13.4 - Beijing National sports complex
Beijing National sports complex in China
It has employed methods to obtain electricity from solar energy and water
requirements from rain water. Ventilation is effected naturally. Therefore, the
maintenance of the sports complex is carried out by low cost (figure 13.4).
Wayne L. Morse court complex in
USA
Irrigation required for plants is minimized
by growing plants which can withstand
drought conditions. Use of water has
been cut down by 40% by the installation
of waterless urinals, toilets and showers
which use water minimally (figure 13.5).
Figure 13.5 - Wayne L. Morse court complex
42
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
43
K2 Housing project in Australia
This housing complex utilizes renewable
energy only. Use of recycled timber,
rain water, solar water heaters and
photovoltaic panels can be seen in this.
By such measures, it has been able to
reduce electrical supply by 55%, water
supply by 53% and petroleum gas supply
by 46% (figure 13.6).
Bud Clark Commons housing complex
in USA
This housing complex uses solar water
heaters to get hot water, a roof with a
plant cover absorbing heat and rain water,
devices to purify bathroom effluents to
be used in toilets and fiberglass windows
opening under hot conditions. This project
saves energy worth of 60 000 US dollars
annually (figure 13.7).
Figure 13.6 - K2 housing project
Figure 13.7 - Bud Clark Commons housing
complex
You should not misunderstand that the aim of green
concept is only enhancing the plant cover to appear
in green. It may be quite clear to you from the above
examples. Minimizing the emission of greenhouse
gases (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide etc.)
that cause increase in global warming is also a major
aim of the green concept. Therefore, all processes
supporting it belong to the green concept. Let us
examine how the present agricultural and industrial
processes can be geared for this.
Figure 13.8 - Symbol of the Green
Concept
13.2 Agricultural Process
Organic farming
The production process that promotes the wellbeing of the agricultural environmental
system, microbial activity in soil, bio-diversity and biological cycles is called
organic farming.
44
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
45
Use of organic fertilizers can be given as a major aspect of organic farming. As the
harvest that flourishes by absorbing nutrients from the soil of the cultivated land is
removed from it, the soil becomes deficient in nutrients. Therefore, the soil should
be supplied with nutrients from outside. It is done by applying fertilizers, containing
artificially prepared minerals and artificially synthesized chemicals, which
are being applied more and more. But, instead of this, organic fertilizers such as
compost formed by subjecting plant or animal materials to natural processes can be
applied. Some facts regarding the importance of the use of organic fertilizers rather
than inorganic fertilizers can be listed as follows.
² Application of inorganic fertilizers destroy many micro-organisms and
macro-organisms such as earthworms which are helpful for the crop. It affects
existence of the natural environment badly.
² Excessive application of inorganic fertilizers affects human health through
plant products. Some heavy metals contained in, enter the human body giving
rise to unfavourable effects.
² Organic fertilizers add nutrients falling within a wide range whereas inorganic
fertilizers can provide only a few nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus,
potassium and sulphur.
² Large amount of money need not to be spent for organic fertilizers. Fertilizers
can be produced ourselves using refuse such as straw, plant debris, chaff and
saw dust.
² There is a greater demand for rice, vegetables, fruits and leafy vegetables
obtained from organic farming among the discerning people in Sri Lanka.
Therefore, the farmers growing them as well as the traders who sell them can
have a higher income.
² The structure of the soil will be improved with the time by using organic
fertilizer.
Another fact of organic farming is the use of traditional agricultural practices for
pest control. The pesticides used at present are highly poisonous chemicals that are
synthesized artificially. Weedicides, insecticides and fungicides belong to them.
Use of these pesticides causes inestimable environmental degradation and it can be
prevented by employing traditional agricultural practices. These may be biological
methods, mechanical methods or religious rituals. Some traditional agricultural
practices used for pest control are given below.
² Spread other organisms that destroy eggs and larvae of pests
² Control pests using insect-repelling substances
('Dahaspethiya' flowers/'Sevvandipoo', juice of neem seeds, plants of citrus family)
² Water management (restrict water or excess water) to control pests
44
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
45
²
In order to protect the cultivated land from harmful insects, an oil lamp is lighted
in the land at night. Then the insects attracted to the flame are caught by it and
die. Hence, this is known as a light trap.
² After sowing seed paddy in a paddy field, a 'diya holmana' is made below
the 'vakkada' (overflow) to protect them from birds. Because of the sound it
produces, the birds fly away.
² To protect paddy in a paddy field from mice, sticks each tied with a coconut
husk are planted in several places in the paddy fields. Then, the birds such as
owls perch on them and hunt the mice.
² Crop rotation avoid the establishment of pests in the crop land.
Assignment 13.2
Collect information about the traditional agricultural practices used for pest
control either by consulting elders or electronic/print media and prepare a booklet.
As the side effects of present day agricultural practices carried out neglecting the
traditional knowledge descended for long about farming in Sri Lankan society
and without modern scientific knowledge farmers have to face tragedies like the
chronic kidney disease. In addition to that, diseases such as dermatitis and neuro
diseases are common.
Water management
"Let us not drain even a single drop of water falling from the sky into the sea
without being used" declared so in the past by king 'Parakramabahu' the Great, was
the importance of water management. We are the one and the only nation that did an
environment friendly water management for agriculture from the past. Tanks, dams
and irrigation canals which give supreme contribution to sustain lives of millions
of people from thousands of years back to date, are magnificent examples for rain
water conservation (figure 13.9 (a)).
River
ead w
H
Out spill
l
a l
Tank
Tank bund
Sluice
Ralapanawa
Canals
Figure 13.9 (a) – 'Parakrama samudraya'
Figure 13.9 (b) – Major parts of a tank
Sluice gate
Bisokotuwa
46
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
47
A reservoir of water made by erecting a dam across a river, stream (oya) or a
tributary of them with the aim of irrigating for farming an area which is short of
water supply is used in earlier times.
Low level areas in large flat areas are made into tank systems where rain water
got stored. These tanks are connected where rain water get collected and flow into
nearby tanks. The stored water is used in dry zones during whole year. A tank is a
system full of the green concept. This is confirmed by considering the components
of a common plan of a tank (figure 13.9 (b)).
Collecting of rain water
As an individual person, there are courses of action which
we can take to conserve rain water. One such measure is
utilizing rain water falling on the roofs of houses and other
buildings, during drought (figure 13.10).
Drip irrigation
is
the most
efficient
This
micro-irrigation method
used
at present. In this, lateral pipes
connected to a main pipeline from
the water source are laid closer
to the root system of every crop
plant. Water drips in the form of droplets from small devices
called emitters in these pipes. Since water seeps only to the
root system, water is not wasted and the growth of weeds is
controlled (figure 13.11).
Figure 13.10 – A device set
up in a house to collect rain
water
Figure 13.11 – Drip
irrigation
Land management
46
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
47
Management of use and development of the land resource is known as land
management.
Land provides the environment for agriculture. But, when using it there may be
favourable as well as unfavourable impacts on the environment. Especially the
misuse of land leads to collapse of natural equilibrium including the increase in
the emission of greenhouse gases. The reason for this is that if maximum use is not
made from the existing land, lands with forests have to be used for cultivations. This
causes deforestation, so the green cover is reduced. Therefore, land management
should focus the green concept.
Some steps taken in land management are given below.
Improving the soil structure so that water and air are retained well
² Making a soil texture suitable for agriculture
²
² Making a good draining system in the land
²
² Cultivated better suited crops in respective places in the land.
Improving the quality of soil by applying fertilizers
Figure 13.12 – A managed cultivated land
Indicated below are a few advantages that can be obtained by sustainable
management of agricultural lands.
Improving the quality of natural resources, soil and water
²
Improving productivity
² Reducing production risk
²
² Raising economic value
² Minimizing disasters
² Minimizing effects to the environment
Several green concept centered cultivation methods used in land management for
high productivity are given in table 13.1.
48
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
49
Table 13.1
² Mixed crop cultivation Cultivating one or more crops along with one main
crop in a same plot of land is referred to as mixed crop
cultivation. This yields many advantages.
² Crop rotation
² Growing crops
improved by
bio-technology
² Since nutrients are absorbed in balance from the
soil, the quality of soil is conserved.
² Since there are different types of crops, the growth
of weeds and damage caused by insect pests are
minimized.
² Crops withstand unfavourable climatic conditions
and plant diseases are suppressed.
Increases the total yield
²
² Affords maximum benefits out of limited resources
In this method, several crops are grown in the same
plot of land from season to season according to an
order. Mostly in crop rotation, four crops, a cereal, a
legume, a yam crop and a commercial vegetable crop
are grown.
² By growing different types of crops, nutrients in all
the soil layers are exploited.
² Different modes of land preparation improves the
physical, chemical and biological features of the
soil.
When improving plants by bio-technology, their
tolerance to drought and resistance to diseases and
pests increase while the nutritive value and taste of
plant products also increase.
e.g.
² Developing high quality varieties of organisms
through hybridization
² Developing maize plants resistant to a harmful
weevil species
² Producing varieties of rice which are resistant to
pests
² Producing a variety of 'Ransahal' containing vitamin
A
² Making crop varieties which produce higher yield
48
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
49
Post-harvest technology
Cleaning, classifying and packaging the
harvest immediately after harvesting so
that its quality is preserved, is known as
post-harvest technology (figure 13.13).
The post-harvest process
includes
plucking the harvest, packing the harvest,
transporting and selling.
In Sri Lanka, it can be seen that
post-harvest technology operates at a very
low level. It seems that, in our country
people are little interested in plucking,
packaging and transporting harvest scientifically. Therefore, a greater part of the
harvest is disposed without consumption. This drops the income of the producer as
well as the seller while increase the price of the products. Moreover, the opportunity
to consume high quality food is reduced due to poor post harvest technology.
Figure 13.13 – Post-harvest arrangements
13.3 Industrial process
Use of chemical substances
We have accustomed to use chemical substances for various needs of our day to day
life. They can be indicated as follows.
y Food additives
y Cleaning agents
y Medicines
y Disinfectants
y Cosmetics
y Paints
Most of these chemicals are artificially synthesized substances. Once added to
the environment they retain for a long time in the same form. This disturbs the
environmental balance. Because of this, we need to minimize the use of these
chemical substances as much as possible or use natural substitutes instead of them.
Some measures that can be taken in this regard are as follows.
² Avoid the consumption of flavoured food as much as possible and use home
prepared natural flavours such as spices instead of artificial flavours.
50
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
51
² Use chemicals such as turmeric and asafoetida which have been used by our
ancestors to kill germs.
² Using natural medicinal substances, instead of mercury containing carcinogenic
creams available in the market to brighten the skin.
Construction of buildings
The aim of green building concept is to construct buildings with a green environment
beset with plants. A few basic principles should be abided by when constructing
green buildings. They are;
² Presence of green plants in the premises
² Get clean air through ventilation methods such as doors and windows
² Minimize the amount of waste
² Use energy efficiently
² Consume water efficiently
² Use natural materials for construction
² Make the maintenance cost minimal
² Device to reach natural light
Through the green buildings concept, environmental resources can be consumed
causing minimum loss to the environment. Therefore, maximum benefit can be
utilized from the nature. Technology also can be used for this.
e.g.
² Minimizing the amount of heat by a plant cover
² Producing electricity by solar cells
² Obtaining hot water to bathrooms from solar heaters
² Fixing large windows to receive more natural light and ventilation
50
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Figure 13.14 – A building constructed according to the green concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
51
Green transportation
A massive revolution of transporting activities has been taken place with the
technological development in modern world. It causes to increase the productivity,
efficiency and the comfortable luxuries life pattern. But, unfavourable effects
caused due to this development make long term disadvantageous results. Large
amount of fuels burn daily for transporting goods and passengers. The result is
collecting green house gases such as CO2 and NO2 more in the atmosphere.
Vehicles of turbo engines which combust compressed air with petrol, release more
NO2 gas in addition to CO2. Hence, attention must be paid towards of minimizing
the emission of greenhouse gases in transporting activities. This concept is known
as green transportation.
e.g.
² Minimizing usage of vehicles individually
² Using transporting methods which do not consume fuels (walking,
cycling)
² Aware and facilitate citizens to use hybrid vehicles
² Promote the concept of vehicles using solar cells and electricity among
public
² Facilitating, transporting methods through water ways such as streams
and rivers
When transporting food and other goods, it burns large amount of fuels that energy
consumption is also need to cut down to decrease food miles. Consumption of
local food is also need to appreciate. Every individual must take steps to minimize
the emission of greenhouse gases in transporting activities so, that every body can
contribute to solve global crises.
Assignment 13.3
Make a list of activities that you can engage for green transportation.
Get the ideas and proposals of your friends in classroom, by presenting the list
you prepare.
The above discussion reveals us that, man has changed his living environment
drastically for his luxurious life by exploitation of limited resources unlimitedly.
Other organisms on the Earth has no privilege to use environmental resources as
human population, although they live in the same land.
52
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
53
Number of global issues has been arisen from unusual exploitation of natural
resources by some people. The serious threaten is global warming. Hence, it is
the responsibility of man to avoid every activity which causes the emission of
greenhouse gases.
From birth to death, every activity of man cause producing CO2. It can be inferred
that, there is no human activity which do not cause production of CO2. This can be
clearly understood by studying 'Carbon footprint' of an individual.
It states us the amount of CO2 (metric tons) emitted by an individual. Through
out a year, a large amount of carbon is being released by people during activities
like taking food, drinking, clothing and occupation. Agricultural activities and
transportation related with 'Food mile' is again related with transporting activities.
Another major issue caused due to shortage of drinking water can be explained,
by the concept of 'Water footprint'. You will learn more details about food mile,
carbon footprint and water footprint in grade 11.
For extra knowledge
Carbon footprint
The amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere within a given time
period as a result of the activities of a particular individual, a production, an
activity or an organization is a carbon foot print. Total carbon foot print cannot
be calculated precisely as CO2 is produced naturally and it needs more data to
calculate.
Water footprint
The amount of fresh water utilized in the production or supply of the goods and
services used by a particular person or group.
Food mile
The distance over which a food item is transported during the journey from producer
to consumer, is known as food mile. This depends according to the amount of food
consume per meal and the location where the food is produced.
52
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
53
Summary
² Following guidelines and policies required to maintain goods and services,
not causing damage or causing minimum damage to the natural environment
of the Earth, is referred to as green concept.
² Minimizing the emission of greenhouse gases which increase global warming
is also a main objective of the green concept.
²
In order to align with the green concept, the present agricultural and industrial
processes should be subjected to a drastic transformation.
² The production process that improves the wellbeing of the agricultural
environment, biological activity in soil, bio-diversity and biological cycles is
called organic farming.
² Use of organic fertilizers is a main aspect of organic farming.
² Another aspect of organic farming is the adoption of traditional agricultural
practices for pest control.
² Tank (wewa) is a system replete with the green concept. This is justified by
considering the components of a common plan of a tank.
² Management of the use and development of the land resource is called land
management
² Post-harvest technology is the cleaning, classifying and packing of the harvest
of a crop immediately after packing the yields, so that its quality is preserved.
² The principle aim of green buildings or the sustainable construction concept
is the construction of buildings with high efficiency of using energy, water
and materials while minimizing the impact on man and the environment.
² Minimizing emission of greenhouse gases in transportation is called as green
transportation.
54
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
55
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. The meaning of green concept is described by following statements.
a - enhancing the plant cover appearing in green
b - minimizing the emission of greenhouse gases that increase global
warming
c - maintaining goods and services not harming or harming minimally to
the natural environment on Earth
Out of these, select the correct statements,
1. Only a
2. Only a and b 3. Only a and c
4. a, b and c
2. Utilization of solar energy supports the green concept because,
1. it conserves resources on Earth
2. it minimizes emission of greenhouse gases
3. more energy can be produced
4. it is available only during day time
3. Select the substance that cannot be used to produce organic fertilizers, from
the following.
1. Straw
2. Chaff
3. Plant litter
4. Polythene
4. Which of the following introduces the substances, that can be used for making
compost fertilizers?
1. Straw, plant litter, cow dung, animal urine
2. Straw, plant litter, polythene, cow dung
3. Plastic, straw, plant litter, animal urine
4. Papers, straw, plant litter, cow dung
5. From the following statements, which one is incorrect about post-harvest
technology?
1. Post-harvest technology is the cleaning, classifying and packing of the
harvest immediately after harvesting so that its quality is preserved.
2. The major aim of post-harvest technology is the addition of preservatives
to the harvest immediately after harvesting.
3. Harvesting, packing, transporting and selling the yield belong to
post-harvest technology
4. Weakening of post-harvest technology causes hike in prices of the
products.
54
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
55
6. Which one of the following is not followed in the construction of green
buildings?
1. Collecting and using rain water
2. Heating water by solar heaters
3. Producing electricity by building natural gases
4. Purifying effluent water from bathrooms and to use in latrines
7. Some statements about organic farming are given below.
a - Organic farming is favourable for soil micro-organisms
b - The yield of organic farming is high quality
c - Organic fertilizers is a major application of organic farming
Of the above, the true statement(s) is/are
1. Only a
2. Only a and b 3. Only a and c
4. a, b and c
8. Which of the following is not a feature of a building constructed according to
the green concept?
1. Using natural light more
2. Fixing large windows for better ventilation
3. Producing electricity by solar cells
4. Using an air conditioner to maintain a suitable temperature
9. Consider the following two statements.
Statement A -
Increase in global warming is a main environmental problem
seen at present
Statement B - The main reason for the increase in global warming is the
exclusive emission of greenhouse gases to the environment
Of the above statements,
1. Only A is true and B is false
2. A is false and only B is true
3. Both A and B are false
4. Both A and B are true
10. Which of the following is not an environment-friendly method of pest control,
1. Use of bio pesticides
2. Collect and destroy the pests
3. Use natural 'Kem krama' (simple and occult treatment that's done secretly)
4. Destroy the pests by machines
56
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
57
(02) Answer the following.
i. Name a place where green concept can be well observed in Sri Lanka.
ii. The artificially synthesized, highly poisonous substances used to control
pests are called ……………..
iii. Write two methods of generating electricity according to the green
concept.
iv. Write two advantages of the use of inorganic fertilizers.
v. Write five substances that are used in day to day life which contain
artificial chemical substances.
(03) Give short answers.
i. What is green concept?
ii. What is the aim of green concept?
iii. State two things which are important in land management.
iv. State two advantages brought about by promoting post-harvest
technology.
v. Write one way by which you can contribute to green transportation.
Technical Terms
Green concept
- yß; ixl,amh
Organic fertilizers
- ldnksl fmdfydr
Pest control
- m<sfndaO md,kh
Water management
- c, l<ukdlrKh
Transportation of food
- wdydr mßjykh
Food preservation
- wdydr mßrlaIKh
Food security
- wdydr iqrlaIs;;dj
Post harvest technology - miq wiajkq ;dlaIKh
Eco - friendliness
- mßir ys;ldó nj
Green transportation
- yß; m%jdykh
- £_ø© GsnUP¸
- ÷\uÚ¨ £\øÍPÒ
- ¥øhU Pmk¨£õk
- }º •Põø©zxÁ®
- EsÄ¨ ÷£õUSÁµzx
- EnÄ |ØPõ¨¦
- EnÄ¨ £õxPõ¨¦
- AÖÁøh°ß ¤ßÚµõÚ öuõÈÝm£®
- `ÇÀ ÷|¯•øhø©
- £_ø©¨ ÷£õUSÁµzx
56
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
Science | Artificial Environment and Green Concept
57
14
Reflection and
Refraction of Waves
14.1 Reflection of light
Light is a very important form of energy for man. Let us briefly recall what we
have learnt about light in grades 6 and 7. Let us do the assignment 14.1 for this.
Assignment 14.1
² According to the activities in table 14.1 what are the conclusions you can
made regarding the characteristics of light.
Table 14.1
Activity
Conclusion
Candle
Cardboards with
a hole
Lasers Torch
Plane mirror
Light is composed of very thin light rays which travel in straight lines. Light travels
through a vacuum or a transparent medium in straight lines, and reflects when
strikes on a reflecting surface (mirror).
Bouncing back of light ray into the same medium, when strikes on a surface, is
known as reflection of light.
58
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
59
Let us study further about the reflection of light.
14.1.1 Reflection of light by a plane mirror
Let us do the activity 14.1 to study how light rays get reflected from a plane mirror.
Activity 14.1
You will need :- A plane mirror, a sheet of white paper, an electrical torch or a
laser torch, a pair of scissors, a ruler, a protractor, a pencil
Method :-
² Place the sheet of white paper on the table
² Place the plane mirror perpendicular to the paper using a stand.
² Draw the mirror line on the paper
² Direct a narrow inclined beam of light, along the paper on to the mirror using
the electrical torch or the laser torch.
² Observe how the beam of light reflects from the mirror
² Trace the incident and reflected rays on the paper using the pencil
² Remove the mirror and complete the rays using the ruler
² Construct the normal line to the plane mirror at the point of incidence
² Measure the angles at either sides of the normal line
²
²
²
²
²
²
²
Point of incidence
Incident ray
Angle of
Incidence
Angle of
reflection
Normal line
Figure 14.1
Reflecting ray
58
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
59
A diagram that shows the way the rays are traveling is known as a ray diagram.
In the activity 14.1, what you have constructed is a ray diagram to show the reflection
of a light ray from a plane mirror after its incidence.
² The ray that falls on the mirror is called the incident ray.
² The point where the incident ray contacts with the mirror is the point of
incidence.
² The ray that reflects away from the mirror is known as the reflecting ray.
² The perpendicular line drawn to the mirror at the point of incidence is the
normal or the normal line.
² The angle between the incident ray and the normal line is called the angle of
incidence and the angle between the reflected ray and the normal line is called
the angle of reflection.
We can do the activity 14.1 using pins instead of using electrical torch. Let us do
the activity 14.2 by using pins.
Activity 14.2
You will need :- A sheet of white paper, A plane mirror, four pins, a ruler, a pencil,
a protractor, a stand
Method :-
² Place the sheet of paper on the table
² Place the plane mirror perpendicular to the paper using the stand
² Draw the mirror line on the paper
² Fix two pins in front of the plane mirror which should be on an inclined
straight line to the mirror.
² Observe the images of the pins through the mirror
² Fix another two pins on the paper, which are in line with the two images.
² Now remove the pins and the mirror. Draw straight lines connecting the pin
marks. Complete the ray diagram by constructing the normal line at the point
if incidence, as done in activity 14.1
² Measure the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection.
60
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Figure 14.2
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
61
14.1.2 Laws of reflection
Observations of the activities 14.1
and 14.2 can be summarized as
follows.
² When light is reflecting; that the
incident ray, reflecting ray and
the normal line are in the same
plane.
² That the values of the angle
of incidence and the angle of
reflection are equal.
Point of incidence
Angle of
incidence
Angle of
reflection
Incident ray
Reflecting
ray
Normal line
Above conclusions are true for all
the instances of reflection of light. Therefore, they are considered as the laws of
reflection. There are two laws of reflection.
Figure 14.3
1. The incident ray, the reflecting ray and the normal line drawn at the point of
incidence are in the same plane.
2. The value of the angle of incidence is equal to the value of the angle of
reflection.
14.1.3 Regular reflection and diffuse reflection
Let us observe how parallel rays of light are reflected from a smooth surface and a
rough surface. Let us do the activity 14.3, using a plane mirror as a smooth reflecting
surface and a crushed aluminium foil as a rough reflecting surface.
Activity 14.3
You will need :- An electrical torch or a laser torch, A plane mirror , an aluminium
foil, a joss stick
Method:-
² Aim a beam of light on to the plane mirror and the crushed aluminium foil
separately as shown in the figure 14.4
² Observe how the light is reflecting in each instance
² Discuss your observations in the class room
(For clear observation, spread some smoke near the set-up using the joss stick)
60
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
61
Laser
torch
Thin
aluminium
layer
Plain mirror
Figure 14.4 (a) - Regular reflection
Figure 14.4 (b) - Diffuse reflection
Figure 14.4 - Regular and diffuse reflections
Note :- Do not aim the laser rays into eyes, as they are harmful to eyes.
You may have observed that parallel light rays are reflected parallelly by plane
mirror (figure 14.4 a) and parallel light rays are reflected to various directions by
crushed aluminium foil (figure 14.4 b).
According to the activity 14.4, it is clear that light reflection is of two types.
1. Regular reflection
2. Diffuse reflection
More information of these two types are given in the table 14.2.
Table 14.2 - Regular and diffuse reflection
Regular reflection
Diffuse reflection
² This is done by smooth surfaces
² Parallel
parallelly
light
rays are
reflected
e.g. Reflection of sun light by a plane
mirror
Reflection of laser rays by a plane
mirror
62
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
² This is done by rough surfaces
² Parallel light rays are reflected to
various directions
e.g. Reflection of sun light by the pages
of a book
Reflection of sunlight by objects like
the Earth, plants, buildings and rocks
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
63
Think whether regular reflection or diffuse reflection is commonly found in
day-to-day life.
Both regular reflection and diffuse reflection are useful in day-to-day life.
Instances where regular reflection is useful
² Regular reflection is commonly found, when using mirrors
e.g. To watch ones own face, to use light microscope
² To create vivid light patterns in various shows.
² To get information of the motion of machine parts in industrial plants
Figure 14.5 - Create vivid light
patterns in various shows
Figure 14.6 - Using light
microscope
Instances where diffuse reflection is useful
62
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
63
Figure 14.7 - Objects in the environment can be seen
from all directions as they reflect sun light diffusely
Figure 14.8 - Letters in a book can be
seen from all directions
Assignment 14.2
² Discuss in the classroom, the instances where regular reflection and diffuse
reflection are useful. Tabulate the facts you discussed.
14.1.4 Images formed by plane mirrors
Images are formed because of the reflection of light, emitted by objects, from a
plane mirror. For instance, the image of an electrical torch place before a plane
mirror can be seen through it.
Let us do the activity 14.4 to study how an image is formed by reflection of light.
Activity 14.4
You will need :- A cardboard box,
an electrical torch,
plane mirror, a
stand, piece of
cardboard, a pair
of scissors, white
paper
Method:-
² Place the white paper on the table.
² Fix the plane mirror, perpendicular to the white paper.
² Place the lighted torch inside the box, with a long slit. Focus the beam of
Figure 14.9
light, to the slanted mirror plane, emitted by torch.
² Look at the reflected beam of light.
² What can you observe through the plane mirror.
² Get the help of teacher to explain your observation.
In this activity you observed, the image of lighted slit. The light reach to eye from
object (slit) which get reflected from the mirror.
We see as the light reaches to eye from a point behind the mirror. It is known as
image.
Let us draw the ray diagram for the image formed by plane mirror.
Two rays are enough for drawing a ray diagram.
Let us do the activity 14.5 to draw a ray diagram of an image of pointy object, kept
infront of a plane mirror.
64
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
65
Activity 14.5
You will need :- Two laser beams, a white paper, a plane mirror, a stand, a pair
of scissors
Method :-
² Make a slit in the piece of cardboard
² Place the white paper on the table and fix the mirror to the stand perpendicularly
(figure 14.10)
² Direct two lazer beams through the slit, slantly to the mirror.
² Observe the reflected beams of light.
What can you observe now?
Figure 14.10
In the activity 14.5, the pointy object is the slit made in cardboard. The light rays
reach from slit, get reflected by the plane mirror and from an object behind the
mirror.
According to the observation done in activity 14.5 we can illustrate the ray diagram.
For that let us engage in activity 14.6.
64
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
65
Activity 14.6
You will need :- A sheet of white paper, a ruler, a pencil, a protractor
Method :-
² Draw a straight line, on the sheet of paper to indicate the plane mirror.
² Mark a point, about 5cm away from the mirror plane (point-form object).
² Starting from this point, draw two inclined light rays to the mirror plane.
² Mark the points of incidence and construct the normal lines for the two rays
drawn.
² Measure the angles of incidence and mark the angles of reflection equals to
them.
² Now construct the reflecting rays.
² Extend back the reflecting rays by dotted lines to meet them together.
² Mark the point where the reflected rays meet together when extended back.
That is the point where the image is formed.
Object
Object
distance
Image
distance
Image
Figure 14.11
² Connect
the object
and the image by a
dotted line.
² Measure the distance
between
the mirror
and the object (object
distance)
the
distance between the
mirror and the image
(image distance).
and
² Confirm
the object
distance is equal to
the image distance.
Assignment 14.3
Construct a ray diagram to show how the image is formed, of a point-form object
kept 8 cm away from a plane mirror
(It is suitable to use an A4 sheet of paper for this)
Measure the object distance and the image distance
You have already learnt in grades 6 and 7, some of the characteristics of images
formed by the objects kept infront of plane mirrors. Recalling them, let us do the
activity 14.7 to study the characteristics of images formed by plane mirror.
66
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
67
Activity 14.7
You will need :- A plane mirror, a white screen, a ruler, a stand, pieces of cardboard
on which letter O, B, F and d are drawn to the height of about
5cm (When you write the letter O draw a vertical line and colour
half of it).
Method :-
² Fix the plane mirror vertically to the stand.
² Place each piece of cardboard, on which a letter is drawn, in front of the plane
mirror. Observe the image of the letter through the mirror.
² See whether the image can be taken on to a screen.
² Repeat the activity, keeping some other objects in front of the mirror.
² Tabulate your observations in the table 14.3
Table 14.3
How the image
is seen
upright/inverted
upright
Whether lateral
inversion
occur/not occur
occur
Equality of the
sizes of object
and image
equal
Whether image can
be/cannot be taken
on to a screen
cannot be taken on
to a screen (virtual)
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
...............
Letter/
Object
B
F
d
O
Changing right hand side and the left hand side of the image is known as lateral
inversion.
If the image can be taken on to a screen it is known as a real image, if it cannot be
taken on to a screen, it is known as a virtual image.
According to the activity 14.7, the characteristics of images formed by the objects,
kept in front of a plane mirror can be listed as below.
² Virtual (cannot be taken on to a screen)
² Upright
² Equal to the size of object
² Object distance and image distance are equal
² Lateral inversion occur
Letters like O, A and X cannot be identified under lateral inversion as these letters
are symmetrical.
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
67
66
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Assignment 14.4
Stand in front of a large mirror which is on a dressing table or any other place.
Observe the size and the lateral inversion of your image in the mirror.
Think whether your observations agree with the characteristics of the images
formed by plane mirrors.
14.1.5 Use of plane mirrors
Plane mirrors are widely used for various tasks in day-to-day life. Some of them
are given below.
1. Used in beauty salons and to watch ones own face, for dressing (figure 14.12)
2. In shops to show the number of items increased (figure 14.13)
3. To reflect light for laboratory activities (figure 14.14)
4. To produce multiple images (figure 14.15)
5. To observe the shape and the back side of costumes when selecting items for
fashion activities (figure 14.16)
6. To observe backside of the head when one is having a haircut in a salon
(figure 14.17)
Figure 14.12
Figure 14.13
Figure 14.14
Figure 14.15
Figure 14.16
Figure 14.17
68
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
69
7. For making kaleidoscope
Various colourful patterns can be observed through this, when small pieces of
petals, leaves or pieces of colourful papers are put into this.
Figure 14.18 - Kaleidoscope
Figure 14.19 - Vivid patterns seen
through a kaleidoscope
8. For making periscope
Periscopes are used to observe objects which are located above or below the
position of the observer. (to watch out side from a submarine or a bunker)
Plane mirror
Plane
mirror
Figure 14.20 - Periscope
14.2 Sound
14.2.1 Reflection of sound
Be silent and listen to the environment for a moment. You may observe sounds
generated by the vibration of various objects. Let us pay our attention to an important
property of sound. Let us do the activity 14.8 for this.
68
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
69
Activity 14.8
You will need :-
A small mechanical clock or a stop
watch, two pieces of PVC tubes to the
length of 30cm each (dia.2.5cm), two
stands, a piece of cardboard to the size
of 30 cm × 50 cm, a smooth metal or
glass sheet to the size of 30 cm × 30 cm
Method :-
Metal or glass sheet
PVC tube
50
45
40
55
5
50
40
60
30
10
20
35
25
30
10
15
20
Stop watch
Piece of cardboard
Figure 14.21
² Place the metal or glass sheet vertically on the table.
² Place the cardboard sheet perpendicular to it.
² Fix the PVC tube to a stand as shown in figure 14.21 and place the stop watch
closer to one end of it.
² Aim the other PVC tube to the glass sheet from the other side of the cardboard
sheet. Adjust the position of the tube till a clear "tick" sound is heard through
it. Mark the position of the tubes on the table.
² Now remove the glass sheet and listen for the "tick" sound of the watch.
² Repeat the activity, changing the position of the watch and using suitable
sound sources instead of clock or stopwatch.
² Discuss in the classroom, the conclusions that can be made for the activity.
² Think of the reason for placing a cardboard sheet between the PVC tubes.
² What is the conclusion that can be made according to the results of this
activity?
It is observed that the sound generated by the source was listened clearly at a certain
point when the metals or glass sheet was there. And the sound could not be heard
when the glass sheet was removed. The reason for this is the reflection of sound
from the metal or glass sheet.
Bouncing back of sound from an obstacle is known as reflection of sound.
The obstacle that reflected sound, in the activity 14.8 was the metal or glass sheet.
Sound is in the environment are constantly subjected to reflection by various
obstacles. Most of the sound reflecting instances cannot be noticed. But, there are
some observable instances. Now let us consider some of them.
70
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
71
14.2.2 Echo
You may have observed that, when a strong sound is made in front of a large obstacle
(a mountain/a building), it is heard over and over again. Let us do the activity 14.9
to experience this.
Activity 14.9
You will need :- A clapper used for starting running events or two wooden sticks
Method :-
² Select a place where there is a
suitable obstacle like a tall building
or a wall.
² Stand about 17 m apart from the
obstacle (minimum distance between
the obstacle and the observer to hear
an echo is 16.5 m).
² Make strong sounds by striking the
clapper several times.
Observer
Obstacle
17 m
Figure 14.22
² Listen carefully after each instance of making the sound.
² Discuss the reasons for observations.
² Repeat the activity while coming closer to the obstacle.
² Make the sound while you are at a distance of 15 m or less to the obstacle (you
can use even the walls of your classroom for this).
² Compare the latter observations with the earlier ones.
Sound generates by the clapper, was reflected by the obstacle. After hearing the first
sound, the reflected sound was also heard after a short while later.
A second hearing because of the reflection of sound after the first one, is known
as echo.
When the obstacle is too close the echo is not clear. This fact is confirmed in activity
14.9.
Sometimes several echoes can be heard, because of the reflection of the first
sound. This happens when the sound is reflected several times. For instance, sound
reflection in an auditorium can be mentioned.
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
71
70
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Assignment 14.5
² List out the instances of sound reflection that you have experienced in your
day-to-day life. Mentioned the obstacle that is responsible for the reflection
of sound in each instance.
For extra knowledge
Though the sound is reflected, clear
echo is not heard when the obstacle
is too close to the observer.
There is a minimum distance that
should be maintained between the
obstacle and observer to hear an
echo. That minimum distance can
be calculated as given below.
² The sense of sound is retained in human ear for 0.1 seconds.
² Sound travels 330 meters per second in air.
² To distinguish two sounds separately, difference between them should be more
than 0.1 seconds.
The distance that sound travels in one second
Distance that sound travels in 0.1 seconds
= 330 m
=
330 m x 0.1s
1s
Total distance that sound should travels to occur an echo
= 33 m
∴The distance that should be between the obstacle and the
observer
=
33 m
2
= 16.5 m
72
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
73
14.2.3 Reverberation
There are some instance in an auditorium or a cinema hall, that the sound emitted
by the loud speaker is not clear. The reason for this is that the echo generated by
the reflection of sound is heard before the initial sound fades off from the ear. Final
result of this is, that the observe experiences a mixed unclear sound.
The persistence of sound for a long time because of the disability to distinguish
the original sound and the echo is known as reverberation.
Reverberation is a disturbance for clear hearing. Therefore, methods are used to
prevent the reflection of sound in auditoria, lecture halls and cinema halls where
clear hearing is expected.
Reverberation occur because of the reflection of sound. Reflection of sound can be
minimized by making the surfaces that sound strikes, to absorb it. Thus reverberation
can be prevented.
Following methods are used in places like cinema halls, auditoriums and studios to
absorb sound and thus prevent reverberation (figure 14.23).
Methods used to prevent reverberation
Making the walls rough
Making the ceilings porous
Hanging rough folded curtains
Figure 14.23 - Methods used to prevent reverberation
Instance where reflection of sound is applied usefully
Let us consider briefly some instances where reflection of sound is used.
1. Ultra sound scanning
Reflection of ultra sound waves is used to observe the shape of internal organs.
This method is known as ultrasound scanning. Ultra sound waves are generated by
a machine and are aimed at the relevant organ from outside of the body. Ultrasound
waves that reflect from the organ are received by the machine. Those waves
formulate the external appearance of the relevant organ on a screen.
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
73
72
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Figure 14.24 - Womb of a pregnant mother
is being subjected to ultrasound scanning
Figure 14.25 - How the foetus developing in the
womb is seen in ultrasound scanning
For extra knowledge
X-ray photographing may be harmful to organs and living body. But the harm is
very less in ultrasound scanning.
2. Finding the depth of ocean bed
It is important to know the depth of the ocean bed in navigation. Reflection of
ultrasound waves is used for this purpose. The method used is known as Sound
Navigation and Ranging (SONAR). The equipment used for this is known Echo
Sounder.
Ultrasound wave
reflected by ocean bed
Ultrasound wave emitted
to reach ocean bed
Figure 14.26 - How the depth of ocean
bed is determined using echo sounder
Figure 14.27 - How the information of
ocean depth is depicted in an echo sounder
The depth of the ocean is determined by the time taken to receive the wave, back to
the equipment after reflecting from the ocean bed.
74
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
75
3. For bats, to identify obstacles at night
Reflection of ultrasound waves helps nocturnal
animals like bats to identify obstacles at night.
Ultrasound waves emitted by them, reflect after
bouncing on the obstacles. According to the time
taken for this, they can determine the distance to
the obstacle.
14.3 Refraction of Light
Figure 14.28 - How the ultrasound
waves emitted by bat is reflected after
bouncing on an obstacle
When light is travelling through a transparent medium, it travels rectilinearly. Now
let us consider an instance that a light ray entering from one transparent medium
to another transparent medium. Let us do the activity 14.10 for studying this
phenomenon.
Activity 14.10
You will need :- A beaker of water, some soap, an electrical torch or a laser torch
Method : -
² Mix some soap in water in the beaker. (without allowing to form lather)
² Direct a thin inclined beam of light using the electrical torch or laser torch.
² Observe how the path of light beam changes when it enters into water.
Laser torch
Thin light beam
Soap mixed water
74
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
75
Figure 14.30 - Directing the light beam
perpendicularly to the water surface
Figure 14.29 - Directing the light beam
with an inclination to the water surface
² Carryout the activity changing the inclination of the thin beam of light
² Discuss your observations in the classroom.
² Answer the following questions while engaging in the activity.
1. What are the two transparent media that the thin beam of light travelled
through?
2. At what place did the beam of light bend?
3. What is the reason for mixing soap into water?
4. What happens when light is directed perpendicular to the water surface?
In the activity 14.10, light rays have traveled from one transparent medium (air)
into another transparent medium (water). The surface where two media come to
contact each other is known as the interface. Light travels from one medium into
another medium through the interface. It may be clear that, always the change of
direction of light occurs at the interface.
It is important to mix soap into water to see the beam of light in water.
The change of direction of light when traveling from one transparent medium
into another transparent medium is known as refraction of light.
The beam of light directed perpendicular to the interface, do not occur refraction.
² During refraction, the ray that is reaching the interface is the incident ray.
² The ray that travels after refraction is the refracted ray.
² The point on the interface where the incident ray falls, is the point of incidence.
² A normal line also can be constructed at the point of incidence.
The way of refraction occurs when a
light ray enters from air to water can be
shown by a ray diagram as in figure
14.31.
76
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Angle of
incident
Incident
ray
Interface
Point of
incidence
Air
Water
Refracted ray
Angle of
refracted
Figure 14.31- The way of refraction occurs when a
light ray enters from air to water
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
77
For extra knowledge
Light travels in a definite velocity in a given medium. Velocity of light differs
from medium to medium.
e. g.
Medium
Vacuum or air
Water
Glass
Velocity of light (meters per second)
3.0×108
2.25×108
2.0×108
Refraction of light occurs because of change of its velocity when traveling from
one medium to another medium.
Refraction of light in a glass block
Let us study how a narrow beam of light (a pencil of light) refracts when directed
into a glass block. Let us do the activity 14.11 for this.
Activity 14.11
You will need :- A glass block, a sheet of white paper, four pins, an electrical
torch or a laser torch, a pencil, a ruler
Method :-
² Spread the sheet of white paper on the table and place the glass block on it.
² Direct an inclined beam of light on to the glass block as shown in figure 14.32.
² Fix two pins on the path of incident ray and the other two pins on the path of
the light ray that travels away from the block.
² Sketch the position of glass block using the pencil
² Remove the glass block, the pins and the torch. Complete the ray diagram.
Glass
block
Incident
ray
Air
Glass
block
Ray of light
Refracted
ray
Figure 14.32 - How light refracts through a
glass block
Figure 14.33 - Ray diagram to show how light
refracts through a glass block
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
77
76
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
14.3.1 Effects of refraction of light
Let us consider briefly, some phenomena that can be seen in day-to-day life, due to
refraction of light.
² Apparent elevation of the bottom of a pond or a container of water
Activity 14.12
You will need :- A tall glass tumbler or a beaker, water, a coin or a nail, a pencil
Method :-
² Put the coin or the nail into the glass
tumbler or the beaker. Fill it with
water.
² Observe the coin or the nail from
above.
² Mark the apparent bottom (the coin
or the nail) When viewed from top,
on the side of the vessel using the
pencil.
² Now measure the real depth and the
apparent depth to the bottom of the
vessel and note them down.
Beaker
Water
Point that
the bottom
can be seen
Nail
Apparent
depth
Real depth
Figure 14.34 - Real depth and apparent depth
It is clear that the observable depth or the apparent depth when viewed from top, is
always less than the real depth from the water surface to the bottom.
It is important to think carefully before step down into a well or a reservoir
because the real depth of it is more than the apparent depth.
For extra knowledge
Birds like kingfisher observe fish in water,
a little above than where they actually are.
But, those birds have an idea of the real
depth to the fish.
Place where
the fish
seems to be
Place where the
fish actually is
78
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
79
² Pencil dipped partially in water seems to be
Pencil
broken at the water surface
A pencil which is partially dipped in water, seems
to be broken at the liquid surface, when viewed
from a side. The reason for this is the refraction of
light when it comes from water to air.
Glass of
water
² Refraction of white light through a prism
A wonderful occurrence can be observed when
white light passes through a glass prism. Let us do the activity 14.13 to study
about this.
Figure 14.35 - How a pencil
dipped in water seems to be
Activity 14.13
You will need :- A glass prism (60 × 60 × 60), a white screen, a piece of cardboard,
a plane mirror
Method :-
² Keep the glass prism on the table.
² Direct a narrow beam of light on to the prism using plane mirror and the piece
of cardboard.
² Let the light that passes through the prism fall on the screen.
² Discuss the reason for your observations in the classroom.
White screen
Thin, white
light beam
Piece of
cardboard
White light
rays
Glass prism
Figure 14.36 - How white light passes through the glass prism
A spectrum of seven colours can be seen on the screen during the activity 14.13.
Separation of white light into seven colours when passing through a prism due to
refraction is the reason for this. Colours of the spectrum are red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo and violet respectively.
Separation of white light when passing through a prism is known as dispersion.
78
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
79
For extra knowledge
Scientist Sir Isaac
showed
Newton
that white
light
composed of
is
seven colours. The
equipment he used
for this is known
as Newton's disc.
Newton's disc is made by painting the segments, equally divided through the
centre of a circle with the seven colours. When this painted circle is rotated the
seven colours mix to give white colour. You also can make a Newton's disc of
your own.
² Occurrence of rainbow
Rainbow is another elegant phenomenon that occurs due to refraction of light.
There are various folktales among people that in connection with the rainbow.
When there is bright sunlight with mist or drizzle, a rainbow can be frequently
observed. Rainbow occurs because of refraction and internal refraction of sunlight
by water droplets in the sky. Here white sunlight is dissociated into colours by water
droplets. A large number of water droplets in the sky contribute to form a rainbow.
Figure 14.37 - How a rainbow is observed
Figure 14.38 - Dispersion of light through
a single water droplet
80
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
81
Summary
² Bouncing back of light to the same medium, after striking on a shiny surface
is called reflection.
² Light reflects according to the laws of reflection.
² Regular reflection and diffuse reflection are the two ways of reflection of
²
²
parallel light.
Images are formed by reflection of light by mirrors.
Images formed by plane mirrors are always upright, virtual and are subjected
to lateral inversion.
² When images are formed by objects in front of plane mirrors, the size of the
object is equal to the size of the image. Distance to the object is equal to the
distance to the image.
²
Instances of reflecting light by plane mirrors are used in day-to-day life.
² Bouncing back of sound by an obstacle is called the reflection of sound
² Echo and reverberation can be mentioned as two phenomena occurred by
reflection of sound.
² Reverberation is a troublesome stage of echo.
² Various methods are used in auditoria, cinema halls and lecture halls to prevent
reverberation.
² Ultrasound scanning and finding depth to ocean bed are some instances where
reflection of sound is put into use.
² The change of direction of light when travelling from one transparent medium
to another transparent medium is known as refraction of light.
² The apparent elevation of the bottom of a pond, dispersion of white light
through prisms, forming of rainbow are some instances where refraction of
light occurs.
80
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
81
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. Select the correct sentence out of the following.
1. Regular reflection occurs well from rough surfaces.
2. Angle of incidence is not always equal to the angle of reflection.
3. Light rays that are falling perpendicular to a plane mirror do not get reflected.
4. Angle of incidence is always equal to the angle of reflection.
2. Underline the correct ray diagram, which shows the reflection from a plane
mirror.
1)
2)
3)
4)
3' Image formed by objects kept infront of plane mirrors are always;
a - Upright and virtual
b - Subjected to lateral inversion
c - Distance to object is equal to the distance to the image
of the above sentences which is/are true,
1. Only a
2. Only a and b
3. Only b and c
4. a, b and c
4. Select the correct statement about echo.
Echo can be heard always when sound is reflected.
1. It can occur at any distance between the observer and the obstacle.
2.
3. Cause for reverberation is not the echo.
4. Reverberation can be eliminated by preventing the reflection of sound.
5. White light can be separated into seven colours by a prism. Conclusion that can
be made according to this phenomenon is;
1. That light can be refracted by the prisms.
That white light is harmful to the body.
2.
That white light is composed of seven colours.
3.
That white light is reflected by prisms.
4.
82
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
83
6. Select the instances, out of those given below, which are associated with only
the refraction of light.
a. Looking at the face using a plane mirror
b. Benching of light when passing through a block of glass
c. Seeing a pencil broken at the surface when it is put into a container of water
d. Occurrence of multi images in a kaleidoscope
1. a and b only
3. c and d only
2. b and c only
4. a and d only
(02) Explain briefly, the following terms which are associated with reflection of
light.
i. Incident ray
iii. Normal line
ii. Reflecting ray
iv. Angle of incidence
v. Angle of reflection
(03) In a school where multi-storied halls are situated close to each other, the
noise of students in classes at upper stairs are heard closely, by the students
in down stairs. What is the reason for this?
(04) A student aimed a lighted electrical torch with an inclination from the top of
a fish tank to observe its bottom. But unexpectedly the beam of light bent at
the water surface. Explain this phenomenon scientifically.
Technical Terms
Reflection
Uniform reflection
Diffuse reflection
Angle of incident
Angle of reflection
Incident ray
Reflecting ray
Normal line
Refraction ray
Lateral apostrophes
Kaleidoscope
Periscope
Light refraction
Dispersive
Hologram
Echo
Reverberation
Echo sounder
- mrdj¾;kh
- iúê mrdj¾;kh
- úidÍ mrdj¾;kh
- m;k fldaKh
- mrdj¾;k fldaKh
- m;k lsrKh
- mrdj¾;k lsrKh
- wNs,ïNh
- j¾;k lsrKh
- md¾Yúl wmj¾;kh
- nyqrEfmalaIh
- mÍlaIh
- wdf,dal j¾;kh
- wmlsrKh
- j¾Kdj,sh
- fodaxldrh
- m%;skdoh
- m%;s èjks udkh
- öuÔ¨¦
- JÊ[PõÚ öuÔ¨¦
- £µÁÀ öuÔ¨¦
- £k÷Põn®
- öuÔ÷Põn®
- £kPvº
- öuÔPvº
- ö\ÆÁß
- •ÔPvº
- £UP ÷|º©õÖ
- Pø»²¸Põmi
- `ÌPõmi
- JÎ •ÔÄ
- {Ó¨¤›øP
- ÷|© Áøõ¯®
- Gvöµõ¼
- öuÔ¨ö£õ¼
- Gvöµõ¼ ©õÛ
82
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
Science | Reflection and refraction of waves
83
15
Simple Machines
Since ancient time, man used machines to make their jobs easy. Let us recall some
instances where simple machines are used.
As you know, it is difficult to lift and
remove a large log or a rock with hands.
You may have experienced in your
day-to-day life, that one end of a metal
rod is kept under the rock or the log and
pushed down from the other rod. This
mechanical device is known as a lever
(Figure 15.1).
Can a single person lift a barrel of oil on
to the deck of a lorry? It is difficult. Let us find out the amount of force that has to
be applied to lift an object directly upwards.
Figure 15.1 – A lever
Hang a piece of metal on a spring balance and take the reading. Then lift the piece
of metal vertically up with your hand, while it is on the spring balance and observe
the reading of the balance.
When the piece of the metal was hanging on the balance, a force which is equal to
the weight of the piece of metal is exerted
downwards on the balance. While you are
lifting the piece of metal, you are applying
a force, which is equal to the weight of it,
upwards. Then, you will observe that the
reading of the balance reaches zero. Thus,
it is clear that a force which is equal to
the weight of an object should be applied
upwards to lift it vertically up.
Figure 15.2 – Drawing an object along an
inclined plane
Now keep a piece of long plank, inclined to the horizontal surface and draw the
same piece of metals along it, as shown in the figure 15.2. Observe the reading of
the spring balance. You will realize that the force exerted to draw the piece of metal
along the ramp is less than the force exerted to lift it directly upwards. Here the job
is made easy.
84
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
85
Here the device used to lift the piece of
metal is known as inclined plane. When
a barrel of oil is to be loaded to a lorry, it
is easy to push it along a ramp as shown
in the figure 15.3.
Figure 15.3 – Loading a barrel of oil to a lorry
using an inclined plane
When you want to pull a bucket of water from a well,
you can tie one end of a rope to the bucket, send the
bucket into the well and draw it upwards by pulling
it from the other end of the rope. Here the force that
should be applied is equal to the weight of the bucket
full of water.
Let us consider an easier way to do this job. Lifting
the bucket of water can be easily done by sending the
rope round a pulley and drawing the other end of the
rope downwards, as shown in the figure 15.4. Drawing
sometimes down is easier than drawing it up. Pulley is
used to change the direction of force as we want.
Figure 15.4 – Lifting an object
using a pulley
To sink a screw nail into something, the force is applied
by turning the handle of screw driver (figure 15.5). It
is common experience that this job is made easier by
the screw driver. Here the device used is known as the
wheel and axle.
Figure 15.5 – Using a screw driver
Strategies used to make the job easy are known as simple machines.
There are four types of simple machines;
Inclined plane
² Lever
²
² Pulley
² Wheel and axle
Let us discuss about these simple machines, in detail.
84
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
85
15.1 Lever
As we have discussed earlier, a metal rod or a
crowbar can be used to lift a wooden log or a
rock. Let us consider it again.
It is difficult to lift the rock to some height. The
force that should be applied to do it is very large,
that a single person cannot do it.
Figure 15.6 – Using a crowbar
It is easy to lift the rock or the log by using a crowbar as a lever (figure 15.6).
Here, why did the lever make the job easy? Let us do the activity 15.1 to find out about
this.
Activity 15.1
You will need :- A book, a Newton spring
ruler or a
balance, a
wooden strip
Method :-
● Weigh the book, using the Newton spring
balance.
a
x
P
● Keep the wooden strip on a piece of wood
Figure 15.7
as a support P to balance it.
● Place the book on the end of the strip as shown in figure 15.7. Couple the
Newton balance to the other end of the strip using a book and pull the balance
vertically downwards, holding its stem.
● Take the reading of the balance.
● Keep the distance from the book to the support a constant and take several
readings by changing the distance from the support to the place where the
balance x is coupled. (Take several readings by keeping the value of greater
than a and less than a).
● In each situation, observe the movement of the place attached to the wooden
strip when the book lifts a vertical distance comparatively.
● Measure the distance x and keep records.
You may have observed that the force necessary to lift the book is less than the weight
of the book when x is greater than a. Here the lever helps to ease the job. When x is
smaller than a, the force necessary to lift the book is greater than the weight of the
book. But, in this case the book moves further than the point where balance is attached
moves. This distance is advantageous in some instances.
86
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
87
In all the above instances, the force applied on the lever is downwards to lift the
book upwards. This change of direction of force is also another advantage of a lever.
Parts of a lever
Let us consider the activity 15.1.
Here, the wooden strip is used as a lever. The force applied on the lever downwards
is known as the effort. The lever lifts the weight of the book. Thus weight lifted by
the lever is load.
Load is balanced by the effort other the wooden support. The point of the wooden
strip that contact with the lever is called fulcrum.
Here we have considered three points of a lever. Load is at one end of the lever.
Effort is at the other end. Load is balanced by the effort over the fulcrum.
Let us consider the lever shown in the figure 15.8 AB is a metal rod. Effort is
applied downwards at B. Rod is balanced on C. So, C is the fulcrum.
Effort arm and load arm
The part of the lever from effort
to fulcrum (CB) is known as
effort arm. The part of the lever
from load to the fulcrum (CA)
is known as load arm.
Ndrh
L o a d a r m
A
Load
C
Fulcrum
f o r t
E f
a r m
B
Effort
Figure 15.8 - Parts of a lever
Mechanical advantage
Mostly a large load can be balanced by applying a small effort on a machine. In the
above activity, when the length of effort arm (x) is greater than that of load arm (a),
the book could be lifted by applying a force less than the weight of the book. This
advantage of the machine is calculated as the ratio of load to effort. This ratio is
known as mechanical advantage.
Mechanical Advantage
=
Load
Effort
According to the figure 15.8, if a load of 36 N is lifted by applying an effort of 12 N,
then the mechanical advantage is;
Mechanical Advantage
=
=
Load
Effort
36 N
12 N
3
86
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
87
To remove the lid of a tin can, you can lift it with your fingers. But, it is difficult. An
easier way is shown in figure 15.9.
Here the handle of a spoon is used as a
lever. One end of the handle of spoon
holds the lid of tin (load). One point of the
handle rests on the edge of tin can. This
point is the fulcrum. When a small force
(effort) is applied at the free end and of the
handle, the lid is thrown up. So, the load of the can is removed easily.
Figure 15.9
Consider the position of the fulcrum of the levers mentioned above. It is positional
between the effort and the load.
Let us consider following situation where effort arm is greater than load arm.
Thus, levers can be divided into three orders according to the positions of effort,
load and fulcrum.
² First order lever
² Second order lever
² Third order lever
First order levers
Levers, in which the fulcrum acts between load and effort are called first order
levers. All the levers we considered in this lesson, up to now, are first order levers.
Figure below shows a first order lever.
Fulcrum
Load
Effort
Figure 15.10
Some examples for first order levers are given below.
Seesaw
Pair of scissors
Forceps
Figure 15.11 – First order levers
88
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
89
Second order levers
Levers in which the load acts between effort and fulcrum are referred to as second
order levers. Nut cracker is an example.
Effort
Fulcrum
Some examples for second order levers are given in figure 15.13.
Load
Figure 15.12
Nut-cracker
Figure 15.13 – Second order levers
Wheelbarrow
The blade and the rod of the nut cracker turns round the pin, by which they are
coupled. Therefore, that pin is the fulcrum. Load acts on the object that is to be cut.
Effort is applied at the far end of the handle.
Third order levers
In third order levers, effort acts between the load and the fulcrum (figure 15.14).
Broom, fishing rod (figure 15.15) and human arm are some examples for third order
levers.
Effort
Fulcrum
Figure 15.14
Load
Load arm is always longer than the effort arm in third
order levers. Therefore, an effort which is greater than
the load has to be applied to balance that rod. Thus, the
mechanical advantage is always less than one. But,
these levers are advantageous because load moves
more for a small motion of the effort.
Figure 15.15 - Fishing rod
88
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
89
Velocity ratio of a lever
Let us consider the lever device used to high a load up.
Load
Y
A
L o a d a r m
C
Figure 15.16
E f f o r t a r m
B
X Effort
Effort is applied on the point B of this lever. Let the point B travels to point X,
which is the displacement of effort. Sometimes load is lifted from A to Y. Therefore,
A Y is the displacement of load.
Velocity ratio of a machine is the ratio of the displacement of effort to the
displacement of load during the same time.
Velocity ratio =
Displacement of effort
Displacement of load
According to mathematics, same value can be obtained by dividing the length of
effort arm by the length of load arm.
The larger the velocity ratio of a machine the smaller the effort that should be
applied on it.
If BX = 60 cm and AY = 15 cm in the above example,
The velocity ratio of that lever =
=
60 cm
15 cm
4
If a velocity ratio of a machine is 4, then theoretically, the effort that should be
applied to lift a load using that machine is 1/4 th of the load.
But, in practice the effort does not decrease down that much (1/4th of the load). The
reason for this is the friction in the system. Thus the mechanical advantage of a
machine is always less than its velocity ratio.
90
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
91
Work-input and work-output
When we have to get work done from a machine, we have to work on the machine.
Work done on the machine is called work-input. When the work input is given to
the machine, some amount of work is done by the machine also. That is known as
work-output.
Let us consider the lever that we mentioned above.
Let the effort at B is 50 N and the load lifted at A is 150 N.
You already know, how to calculate the work done, when a force is acting along a
certain distance.
Work done is the product of the force applied and the distance that the force travelled.
We can calculate the work done on the lever (work input) as follows.
Work done on the lever (work input) = effort × displacement of effort
= 50 N × 60 cm
60
100
m
= 50 N ×
= 30 J
We can calculate the work done by the lever (work-output) as follows.
Work done by the lever (work output) = load × displacement of load
= 150 N × 15 cm
15
100
m
= 150 N ×
= 22.5 J
Here, when 30 J of work is done on the machine, only 22.5 J of work is given out
from the machine.
Therefore, the percentage of the work given out from the machine is for the work-input.
=
22.5 J
30 J
= 75 %
× 100
What we calculated here is the efficiency of the machine. It is 75%.
90
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
91
Efficiency of a machine =
=
=
Work-output
Work-input
Load × distance travelled by load
Effort × distance travelled by effort
distance travelled by load
Load
×
distance travelled by effort
Effort
We can obtain velocity ratio by dividing the distance travelled by effort to the
distance travelled by load. But, here it says other way around. It is similar to the
reciprocal of velocity ratio.
This is;
1
Velocity ratio
Therefore, efficiency = Mechanical advantage ×
1
Velocity ratio
Efficiency = Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
Generally efficiency of a machine is given as a percentage.
Therefore, efficiency = Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
× 100%
Following formulas can be used not only for levers but also for other machines.
Mechanical advantage =
Velocity ratio =
× 100%
Load
Effort
Distance travelled by effort
Distance travelled by load at the same time
Efficiency =
Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
× 100%
92
Science | Simple Machines
= 22.5 J
30 J
= 75 %
× 100 %
15.2 Inclined plane
is also a simple machine.
to lift it up directly.
Inclined plane or a ramp can be used to make a job easy. Therefore, inclined plane
We realized earlier, that a force equal to the weight of an object should be applied
But less effort is enough to draw it along an inclined plane.
Let us do activity 15.2 to understand how effort that should be applied to draw an
object along an inclined plane, changes with its inclination.
You will need :- A long piece of plank, a Newton spring balance, a block of
Activity 15.2
wood, few bricks
Method :-
² Construct an inclined plane using several bricks and the piece of plank.
² Fix a loop to one side of the block of wood. Couple the block to the hook of
Newton balance, find the force necessary to move the block of wooden along
² Reduce the inclination of the plane by removing one brick and repeat the
² Take several readings by reducing the inclination of the plane (by removing
the plane.
above steps.
another brick).
² Compare how the effort changes with the inclination of the plane.
You may have realized that the effort decreases with the decrease of the inclination
of the inclined plane and vice-versa. Mechanical advantage increases with the
Examples for inclined planes used in day-to-day life
decrease of effort.
² The wedge
² The staircase
² The screw jack
² The screw nail
² The ladder
Let us consider
the
calculations regarding
inclined plane.
wedge
screw nail
Figure 15.17 - Instance where inclined plane applied
Science | Simple Machines
93
15.2 Inclined plane
Inclined plane or a ramp can be used to make a job easy. Therefore, inclined plane
is also a simple machine.
We realized earlier, that a force equal to the weight of an object should be applied
to lift it up directly.
But less effort is enough to draw it along an inclined plane.
Let us do activity 15.2 to understand how effort that should be applied to draw an
object along an inclined plane, changes with its inclination.
Activity 15.2
You will need :- A long piece of plank, a Newton spring balance, a block of
wood, few bricks
Method :-
² Construct an inclined plane using several bricks and the piece of plank.
² Fix a loop to one side of the block of wood. Couple the block to the hook of
Newton balance, find the force necessary to move the block of wooden along
the plane.
² Reduce the inclination of the plane by removing one brick and repeat the
above steps.
² Take several readings by reducing the inclination of the plane (by removing
another brick).
² Compare how the effort changes with the inclination of the plane.
You may have realized that the effort decreases with the decrease of the inclination
of the inclined plane and vice-versa. Mechanical advantage increases with the
decrease of effort.
Examples for inclined planes used in day-to-day life
² The wedge
² The staircase
² The screw jack
² The screw nail
² The ladder
Let us consider
the
calculations regarding
inclined plane.
wedge
screw nail
Figure 15.17 - Instance where inclined plane applied
Science | Simple Machines
93
92
Science | Simple Machines
The weight of a barrel of oil is 600 N. Using an inclined plane of 4 m long, it is
lifted to the deck of lorry, which is 1 m high from the ground. The force exerted to
push the barrel along the plane is 200 N.
i. Mechanical advantage of an
inclined plane
=
=
Load
Effort
600 N
200 N
= 3
ii.
Velocity ratio of an inclined
plane
=
=
distance travelled by effort
distance travelled by load
4 m
1 m
= 4
iii. Efficiency of an inclined plane =
Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
3
4
= 75%
× 100%
=
iv.
v.
Work-input = Effort × distance travelled by effort
= 200 N × 4 m
= 800 J
Work-output = Load × distance travelled by load
= 600 N × 1 m
= 600 J
94
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
95
Efficiency can be calculated by using work-input and work-output also.
vi. Efficiency of an inclined plane =
Work output
Work input
× 100%
=
600 J
800 J
= 75%
× 100 %
15.3 Wheel and axle
Wheel and axle is a simple machine which can be used to make a job easy. As wheel
and axle are connected, force applied on the wheel can be transferred to axle to do
the job. Windlass, is such a machine with wheel and axle.
This windlass is made by fixing an L shaped handle to a long cylindrical stem,
which is rested on the stands, so that it can be freely turned (figure 15.18).
Handle
Figure 15.18 - Windlass
Figure 15.19
The rope is wound round the stem and a bucket is tied to the other end of the rope.
When the handle of the windlass is turned, the bucket goes down into the mine.
When the handle is turned the other way, bucket comes up with a load filled into
it. When the handle is turned one round, the rope also winds once round the stem.
Wheel
r1
Axle
When the handle is turned once, the distance
travelled by
the effort
is equal
to
the
r2
circumference of the circle of the handle turned.
Same time load is lifted by a distance which is
equal to the circumference of the stem.
E
- Effort
L
- Load
Figure 15.20
Efficiency can be calculated by using work-input and work-output also.
vi. Efficiency of an inclined plane =
× 100%
Work output
Work input
600 J
800 J
= 75%
=
× 100 %
15.3 Wheel and axle
Wheel and axle is a simple machine which can be used to make a job easy. As wheel
and axle are connected, force applied on the wheel can be transferred to axle to do
the job. Windlass, is such a machine with wheel and axle.
This windlass is made by fixing an L shaped handle to a long cylindrical stem,
which is rested on the stands, so that it can be freely turned (figure 15.18).
Handle
Figure 15.18 - Windlass
Figure 15.19
The rope is wound round the stem and a bucket is tied to the other end of the rope.
When the handle of the windlass is turned, the bucket goes down into the mine.
When the handle is turned the other way, bucket comes up with a load filled into
it. When the handle is turned one round, the rope also winds once round the stem.
Wheel
r1
Axle
r2
E
- Effort
L
Figure 15.20
- Load
the effort
When the handle is turned once, the distance
the
travelled by
circumference of the circle of the handle turned.
Same time load is lifted by a distance which is
equal to the circumference of the stem.
is equal
to
94
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
95
Length of the handle equals to the radius of the circle (r1). The diameter of the circle
is 2r1. Then, its circumference is 2r1×π (π = )22
7 .
Therefore, the distance that effort travels for one turn of the handle is 2πr1
If the radius of the cylindrical stem is r2, then its diameter is 2r2.
The distance that the load is lifted for one turn of the handle is 2πr2
Therefore, the velocity
ratio of the wheel and axleš
=
Circumference of the circle with one turn of handle
Circumference of the stem
=
=
=
2 πr1
2 πr2
r1
r2
Radius of wheel
Radius of axle
Velocity ratio of
wheel and axle
Therefore, the velocity ratio of wheel and axle can be calculated by dividing the
radius of wheel by the radius of axle.
Here are some examples for wheel and axle.
The device which is
used to dismantle
screws in tires
Rotating
handle
The effort is applied on the handle
Handle
Blade
Screw driver
Blade end rotates when the effort
applies on the handle. Force
transmits by the blade.
Figure 15.21 - Use of wheel and axle
96
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
97
15.4 Pulleys
It is mentioned earlier is this lesson, that it is easier to pull a
bucket of water from a well using a pulley rather than pulling
the bucketful of water directly with a rope. Thus you know
that pulley is a simple machine.
Let us do activity 15.3 to compare the force that should be
applied in the two situations above.
Effort
Load
Figure 15.22 - Pulley as a
simple machine
Activity 15.3
You will need :- A pulley, a suitable string,
a Newton spring balance, a
piece of stone or a suitable
load
Method :-
² Measure the weight of stone using the
Newton spring balance.
² Now tie the string to the stone and pull it
over the pulley using the Newton spring
balance as shown in the figure 15.23.
Note down the reading of the balance.
Figure 15.23
Compare the weight of the stone and the force necessary to pull it over the pulley.
You will realize that both readings are more or less the same. (There may be a slight
difference due to the friction of the pulley)
When we are lifting something straight upwards, the force should be applied
upwards. However, when we are using a pulley for this purpose, the pulling force
can be turned appropriately. Applying a force downwards is easier than applying it
upwards. Therefore, it is easy to use a single pulley to lift a load.
96
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
97
Let us solve a simple problem associated with the simple machine, pulley.
The weight of a bucketful of water is 12 N. It is lifted up using a pulley (Assume
that the pulley has no friction.)
Solved problem 1
i. Here, the effort is 12 N, to lift up the load.
Mechanical advantage =
=
Load
Effort
12 N
12 N
= 1
ii. Velocity ratio
When the effort travels same distance, load also travels the same distance.
Therefore, velocity ratio is 1.
iii. Let us see the work-input for the machine.
The work-input for the machine = Effort × distance travelled by effort
Let us take the distance travelled by the effort as 0.8 m.
Then, work-input = 12 N × 0.8 m
= 9.6 J
iv. Let us see the work-output of the machine
Work-output of the pulley = Load × distance travelled by load
= 12 N × 0.8 m
= 9.6 J
v.
The efficiency of the pulley =
Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
1
1
= 100 %
× 100%
=
× 100%
98
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
99
Pulley systems
The motion of a pulley used to draw water from a well
is turning round its axis only. Such pulleys are known
as stationary pulleys. Other than these, there are
pulley systems with moving pulleys.
The figure 15.24 shows a pulley system with a stationary
pulley and a moving pulley.
Here the force is exerted upwards by two strings on the
moving pulley. Therefore, one string has to apply only
a force which is equal to a half of the load. That force
is directed downwards by the string running over the
stationary pulley. Therefore, the mechanical advantage
of this pulley system is 2. This mechanical advantage
is gained only because of the moving pulley. The task
of the stationary pulley is the change of direction of the
force applied.
Stationary
pulley
Moving
pulley
Load
Figure 15.24
In any simple machine, velocity ratio increases with the increase of mechanical
advantage. In the above pulley system, when the effort travels down with the string
a certain distance, load travels only a half of that distance. Therefore, its velocity
ratio is 2.
Mechanical advantage of a pulley system can be increased largely by using several
stationary and moving pulleys. Crane is a complete machine that consists of pulley
systems.
98
Science | Simple Machines
Figure 15.25 - Crane
Science | Simple Machines
99
Complex machines are assembled using several simple machines.
e.g. Bicycle
Cog wheels and chain
(pulley systems)
Brakes
(levers)
Wheel
(wheel and axle)
Paddle
(wheel and axle)
Figure 15.26 - Bicycle
Assignment 15.1
Observe and study about various machines (e.g sewing machine) used in daily
activities. Name the simple machines applied in these machines.
Summary
² Machines are used to make the jobs easy.
² A force is applied on the machine which is transmitted to the load to perform
work.
² Force applied on the machine is effort.
² Force applied by the machine is load.
² There are four types of simple machines. such as lever, inclined plane, wheel
and axel and pulley.
² Complex machines are constructed by assembling simple machines.
² For simple machines the following formula can be used:
Mechanical advantage =
Velocity ratio
Efficiency
=
=
Load
Effort
Distance travelled by effort
Distance travelled by load
Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
× 100 %
100
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines 101
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. Which one of these is not a function of a machine?
1. Effort is decreased than the load.
2. Change the direction of effort appropriately.
3. Getting a job done by applying a force on the machine
4. More work is obtained by doing less work on the machine.
2. Which one out of the following is not a simple machine?
1. Nut cracker 2. Pulley
3. Wedge 4. Engine of a motor vehicle
3. A lever can lift a load of 48 N by applying an effort of 12 N on it. What is
the mechanical advantage of this lever?
1. 1
2. 2
3. 3
4. 4
4. Which are of the following is an inclined plane?
1. Screw driver, wedge, staircase
2. Screw driver, staircase, crowbar
3. Screw driver, wedge, ladder
4. Staircase, screw driver, forceps
5. Following statements are forwarded by two students during a discussion
on instances where effort is greater than the load.
A - Effort is greater than load when screw jack is used.
B - Effort is grater than load when single pulley is used.
C - Effort is always greater than load when third order lever is used.
What is the correct choice of the following?
Statement A
Correct
Incorrect
Incorrect
Correct
1
2
3
4
Statement B
Incorrect
Incorrect
Correct
Correct
Statement C
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Correct
100
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines 101
(02) Copy into your exercise book and fill in the blanks.
The force exerted on a machine is the (a) …………………………….. and
the force controlled by the machine is the (b) ……………………………..
(03)
1. What are the two ways that a machine makes a job easy?
2. Draw lever diagrams separately to show the effort, load and fulcrum of
the three orders of levers.
3. Mention two instances in day-to-day life where inclined plane is used.
(04) The figure here shows how a piece of plank, kept inclined, is used to lift a
load of 450 N to a height of 1.2 m.
The effort applied is 150 N and the efficiency of the inclined plane is 60%.
i. Find the mechanical advantage of the inclined plane.
ii. Calculate the length of the plane.
iii. Find the velocity ratio.
iv. How much is the work-input?
v. How much is the work-output?
450 N
m
2
1
.
Technical Terms
Simple machines
Levers
Fulcrum
Load
Effort
Inclined plane
Pulleys
Mechanical advantage
Velocity ratio
Efficiency
Work input
Work output
Complex machines
wdhdih
wdk; ;,h
- ir, hka;%
- ,Sjr
- Orh
- Ndrh
-
-
- lmams
- hdka;% jdish
- m%fõ. wkqmd;h
- ld¾hCIu;dj
- m%odk ld¾hh
- m%;sodk ld¾hh
- ixlS¾K hka;%
- GÎ¯ö£õÔ
- ö|®¦÷PõÀ
- ö£õÖv
- _ø©
- GzuÚ®
\õ´uÍ®
-
P¨¤
-
- ö£õÔ•øÓ |¯®
- ÷ÁP ÂQu®
- vÓß
- ö£õÔ «x ö\´¯¨£mh ÷Áø»
- ö£õÔ°ÚõÀ ö\´¯¨£mh ÷Áø»
- ]UP»õÚ ö£õÔ
102
Science | Simple Machines
Science | Simple Machines
PB
16
Nanotechnology and
its Applications
Observe well, the figure 16.1 given below.
Figure 16.1 - How a red blood cell is being treated by a micro robot machine
In the above magnified figure, you observed how a human red blood cell is
being treated by a micro robot machine. Machines which are dealing with such
microscopic structures should be extremely small. How can such micro-machines
be constructed? What is the technology used for this?
Science reached another important milestone in year 2016 with the award of
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Jean-Pierre Sauvage, Sir J. Fraser Stoddart, and
Bernard Feringa, three scientists whose groundbreaking work had spawned the idea
of turning molecules into machines. Molecular Robots are not any more aliens to
science.
PB
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 103
Now let us try to understand the science of tiny world which could do such miracles.
Sir J. Fraser Stoddart
Jean-Pierre Sauvage
Figure 16.2 - The scientists who won Nobel prize in Chemistry in year 2016
Bernard Feringa
16.1 Nanometer
What is ‘NANO’?
The word ‘nano’ is derived from Greek language, with the meaning dwarf.
Therefore, nano refers to something very small. At this magic scale you'd not only
see the atoms that everything is made from—you'd actually be able to move them
around.
How small is ‘NANO’?
It is a tiny world. It is quite hard to imagine a world that is small to see. We live on
a scale of meters and kilometers. Nano means "billionth", so a nanometer is one
billionth of a meter, i.e. 10-9 m.
A two-meter-tall
man is two billion
nanometers tall
A pinhead size
freckle is one million
nanometers across
1 meter = 1 billion nanometers
How small
is 'Nano' ?
1 millimeter = 1 million nanometers
Biological cells, such
as these red blood
cells, are about 10, 000
nanometers across
DNA molecules are about
2.5 nanometers wide
1 micrometer = 1, 000 nanometers
1 nanometer
Figure 16.3 - Nano technology refers to inventions on the scale of small molecules or individual atoms
Individual atoms such as hydrogen, are only a few tenths of a nanometer in diameter.
For extra knowledge
Thickness of human hair is about 80 000 nm.
A paper has a thickness of about 100 000 nm.
104
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 105
16.2 Nanotechnology
Nanoscale science investigates the matter at the critical range on 1 - 100 nm.
Making new things on this incredibly small scale is called nanotechnology and it's
one of the most exciting and fast-moving areas of science and technology today.
Nanotechnology is an enabling technology which has applications in a diverse
areas from biology to aerospace.
History of nanotechnology
Nanoscience and technology are not new concepts to the nature. There are many
natural phenomena based on nanotechnology. However, the American physicist
Richard Feynman (1918–1988) is credited with kick-starting modern interest in
nanotechnology. In 1959, in his after-dinner speech called "There's plenty of room
at the bottom," Feynman speculated about an public speaking incredibly tiny world
where people could use atoms and molecules as tools to make things. In 1974,
Japanese engineering professor Norio Taniguchi named this field "nanotechnology."
Nanotechnology truly took off in the 1980s. That was when nanotech-evangelist
Dr. K. Eric Drexler first published his groundbreaking book “Engines of Creation:
The Coming Era of Nanotechnology”. Nanotechnology could not really took
off until the electron microscopy became popular. It was also the decade when
microscopes that were capable of manipulating atoms and molecules on the
nanoscale were discovered.
nanotechnology
Likewise
will, once it gets under way,
depend on the tools we have
then and our ability to use
them, and not on the steps
that got us there. - Eric
Drexler
Figure 16.4 - Richard Feynman
There's plenty of room at the bottom - Richard Feynman
Figure 16.5 - Eric Drexler
Natural Nano-concepts
Nature has created things of nano scale. Let us do the activity 16.1 to get an idea of
such things and their functioning.
104
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 105
Activity 16.1
You will need :- Untorn lotus or alocasia leaf
Method :-
² Put few drops of water on the leaf and observe.
² Record your observations.
Did you see that water droplets
roll on the leaf without sticking
and spreading on it? What can
be the reason for this?
Fig. 16.6 - How water droplets are retained on a
lotus/alocasia leaf
Lotus effect
The self cleansing activity of
lotus leaves because of the
hydrophobic condition on its surface is known as lotus effect. This hydrophobic
nature on the lotus leaf is due to the fine arrangement of the particles of nano scale.
Because of this, water, dirt and micro-organisms that fall on the leaf are automatically
removed. Lotus effect can be seen on wings of insects like dragon flies.
Figure 16.7 – A water droplet on a lotus leaf (stages of various scales)
Nature made nanomaterials
The best example is the functions taking place inside the cell, which is the structural
and functional unit of living organisms (Remember the size of the cell is not at nano
size). In a cell, a large number of nanoscale biological processes like respiration,
excretion, nutrition, growth and photosynthesis are taking place continuously. Cell
organelles, specially adopted for those biological functions can be considered as
machines of nano scale.
Why ‘Nano’? size matters!
Substances behave differently in the world of atoms and molecules. Both physical
and chemical properties of matter substantially changes when the size reaches
100 nm or below although it is the same bulk material. For example, physical
properties such as optical, mechanical, electrical and magnetic properties, change
at the nano-scale while chemical reactivity significantly changes.
106
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 107
e.g.
² Metal copper is transparent on the
nanoscale while gold, demonstrates
a range of colours depending on the
size and shape at the nanoscales.
² Chemically inert gold become highly
reactive at the sizes below 100 nm.
² Carbon can be converted
into
resistance free conducting materials
at nano-level.
² Strength of carbon nanomaterials
could be several times higher than
steel.
Surface area of nano particles
Figure 16.8 - Various colours are observed in
gold nanoparticles when the size of particles are
below 100 nm
The main reason for such changes in physical and chemical properties is the increase
in the surface area (A) to volume (V) ratio (A/V) when the particles size decreases.
As an example let us consider a 1 cm length cube made of silver. The volume of
the cube is 1 cm3 and surface area will be 6 cm2. This 6 cm2 surface area is equal
to the surface area of a stick of gum (chewing gum). But, if that volume of 1 cm3
is filled with cubes of 1 mm length, that surface area of total cubes will be equal
to the surface area of a single page in an exercise book. When the 1 cm3 of volume
is filled with 1 nm sized cubes, total cubes needed, have a surface area which is
about one third of a football court. Nanoscale materials have far large surface areas
than similar masses of large scale materials. As surface area per mass of a material
increase, a greater amount of the material can come into contact with surrounding
materials thus affecting reactivity (Figure 16.9).
106
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 107
Figure 16.9
How to see the nano-scale?
Your fingers are millions of nanometers long, so it's no good trying to pick up atoms
and molecules and move them around with your bare hands or see them using a
common optical microscope. That would be like trying to eat your dinner with a
fork 300 km long.
Scientists have developed electron microscopes that allow us to "see" things on the
nanoscale and also manipulate them. They are;
• Atomic Force Microscopes (AFMs)
• Scanning Probe Microscopes (SPMs)
• Scanning Tunneling Microscopes (STMs)
Figure 16.10 - Electron Microscope
Figure 16.11 - Atomic Force Microscope
Nanomaterials
Key to developments related to
nanotechnology innovations, are based on
the availability of nanomaterials.
Carbon based nanomaterials
Out of the many available nanostructures,
carbon based nanostructures are among the
most exciting of nanomaterials. They can be
rod shape, a foot ball shape or thin sheets.
Figure 16.12 - Image of human hair under
electron microscope
Forms of Carbon
Carbon exists as two distinct polymorphs, carbon graphite and carbon diamonds.
Activity 16.2
² Collect the information about carbon, graphite and diamond. Discuss them in
classroom.
108
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 109
Diamond
Graphite
Figure 16.13 - Structures of diamond and graphite
Graphene
Graphite has a layered structure and scientists
have attempted to separate a single layer
from the structure for several decades. It was
one of the significant achievement of science
when single layer of graphite was pealed off
by two scientists, Andre Geim and Konstantin
Novoselov from University of Manchester.
They received the Nobel prize for physics in
2011 for this ground breaking innovation. It
was a serendipity event in the history where they needed only a scotch tape and a
piece of graphite for this innovation.
Figure 16.14 - Two scientists, Andre Geim
and Konstantin Novoselov
Graphite
Graphene
Figure 16.15
108
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 109
Graphene is a single layer thick graphite sheet ( 0.5 nm thickness) and has unique
properties due to high surface area (figure 16.15). It is highly flexible while
demonstrating very high mechanical properties. It also shows unexpected electronic
and electrical properties. It is considered as the material that has the potential for
revolutionizing the next generation flexible electronics.
SWCNT
MWCNT
Carbon Nanotube
A nanotube is formed when a single layer or
few layers of graphene is rolled into a tube.
When a single layer is rolled it is known as
Single Wall Carbon Nano Tube (SWCNT)
while few layers rolling into a tube leads
to formation of Multi Wall Carbon Nano
Tube (MWCNT).
Figure 16.16 - Single layer or multi layer
nanotubes
For extra knowledge
One of the worlds best graphite deposits is found in Bogala and Kahatagaha, Sri
Lanka. Sri Lanka exports large tonnage of graphite without any further value
addition at a very cheaper price. The price of graphene is $ 100 per gram while
the price of carbon nanotube varies from $ 25 -100 in the global market.
Fullerene
One of the other forms of nano carbon is
fullerene. Fullerene is a molecule which
consists of about 60 carbon atoms arranged
in a shape of a football. Its diameter is about
1 nm.
Let us engage in activity 16.4 to make a model
of fullerene.
Figure 16.17 - Fullerene
110
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 111
Activity 16.4
You will need :- Bristol board,
glue, a pair of
scissors
Method :-
² Take a photocopy of the
in figure 16.18.
picture
Paste it on a bristol board
and cut the block.
²
the
Join
together
letters
A-A, B-B, C-C and D-D,
using glue on the foil-out
tabs.
² You wiil end up having a
ring and 2 caps.
² Stick the five flaps of each
cap onto the 5 hexagon
edges of the ring.
² Repeat on the other side.
A
B
D
D
C
C
Figure 16.18
B
A
Active carbon with pores of nanoscale
Large pores
Adsorped
particles
Medium pores
Micro pores
Active carbon is processed using charcoal,
coconut shell coal, coal, peat etc. as raw
materials. The specialty of active carbon is,
the presence of nanoscale pores. These pores
of nanoscale in active carbon provide a large
surface area. One gram of active carbon has a
surface area in excess of 3 000 m2. The pores
in active carbon has high adsorption capacity.
Figure 16.19 - Presence of nanoscale
pores in active carbon
110
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 111
Due to these high adsorption capacity, it is used to purify water. Nanotechnology
is applied in various fields such as medicine, agriculture, electronics, polymers,
cosmetics, food and textile.
16.3 Applications of nanotechnology
According to the researches carried out for a long time, there are expected as well
as unexpected uses of nanotechnology. Nanotechnology has contributed towards
a revolutionary development in the fields of security, communication, energy,
food, medicine, transportation, agriculture, textile, polymers, cosmetics, electronic
science etc. Few of them are described below.
Field of medicine
² Diagnostic
tools are considered
by using nanotechnology. Thus
the therapeutic efficiency can be
increased. Nanotechnology is being
used to diagnose and treat ailments
like atherosclerosis. One way of
doing this is the introduction of nano
particles which are similar to HDL,
a type of favourable cholesterol,
to remove lipid deposits in blood
vessels.
Figure 16.20 - Nanorobots with diagnostic and
therapeutic ability used to treat ailments
² Clinical methods to treat directly to cancer cells, without damaging healthy
tissues, is being developed using nanotechnology.
² Treatment to replenish bone tissues and nerve tissues are being developed using
nanotechnology.
² Nanotechnology is used to inject drugs without using injection needles and also
to introduce common vaccines for frequent diseases like common cold.
² Nanoparticles are introduced to skin ointments which are used to protect skin
from harmful solar radiation, to increase their quality.
² Nanotechnology is used to detect the amount of sugar and cholesterol in blood.
Field of transport
² Very light and fuel economic motor vehicles, air crafts, boats and space crafts
can be manufactured using nanotechnology.
² Nanotechnology is used in the industry of motor vehicles. Items like heavy duty
rechargeable batteries, heat controllable electronic devices, wear-resistant tires,
thin solar panels and very efficient and cheap sensors are some vehicle parts
manufactured using nanotechnology.
112
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 113
Figure 16.21 - Motor vehicle with nanobattery in body
panels
Figure 16.22 - Nanotechnology used in air filters
in motor vehicles
Power generation
² Cellulose in saw dust, corn stem and grass can be converted to ethanol, which
can be used as a fuel, with the help of enzymes produced by nanotechnology.
² Resistance and tension can be minimized
by using wire codes which are made of
carbon nanotubes to transmit electricity.
² Nanotechnology is used to manufacture
efficient and inexpensive solar panels.
Future solar panels may be flexible and
are printable (paintable) like papers.
² Very thin solar panels can be made using
nanotechnology to stick on computer
covers and cloths. They can generate
electricity using light, friction and body heat.
Electronic science
Figure 16.23 - Flexible solar panel
² Minute and speedy transistors in computers can be manufactured using
nanotechnology. The size of an ordinary transistor is 130 nm – 250 nm. This
size decreased down to 14 nm by 2014 and further decreased to 7 nm by 2015.
² Flexible, foldable, windable, stretchable and washable electronic components
which are powered by solar energy can be made using nanotechnology.
Therefore, it is possible to manufacture very thin, light, unbreakable, durable
and smart electronic equipment.
112
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 113
² Nanotechnology is used to manufacture memory chips, audio equipment,
keyboards with antibacterial covers and mobile phone covers.
Flexible smart phone
Mobile phone covers
Memory chips
Figure 16.24
Producing consumer goods
² Eye spectacles, computer and television screen, door and window glasses made
of nanotechnology are resistant to ultraviolet and infrared radiations. They do
not retain water or micro-organisms and have the ability of auto cleaning.
² Nanopolymers are used to manufacture very light, hard and durable sports
items, head gear, bicycles, vehicle spare parts and weapons.
² Household items like high quality detergents and bleaching agents, air filters,
water filters, antiseptics, stain and dirt resistant paints can be manufactured
using nanotechnology.
² Wearing off and cracking of machine parts can be minimized and life time of
them can be considerably increased by using nanostructured ceramic coatings
and lubricants made using nanotechnology.
² Textiles and cloths which are resistant to dust, dirt and oil particles are
manufactured.
² Nanotechnology can be used in water purification plants to purify water
economically and efficiently. Very thin filter membranes are used for this
purpose.
² Air filters with pores of nanoscale are used to filter dust and micro-organisms in
places like cockpits of air planes.
² Products like aluminum, steel, tar, concrete and cement which are durable,
flexible and have a fine finish are manufactured using nanotechnology.
114
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 115
A surface with nanoplating
Piece of glass with
nanotechnology
Figure 16.25
Keyboards with antibacterial
covers
Assignment 16.1
Collect information on nanotechnology using books, media and internet. Present
the information, thus collected, creatively as a booklet.
16.4 Future condition that may arise because of
nanotechnology
As in any technical application, nanotechnology also may have adverse effects.
These ill-effects may increase with the progress and usage of nanotechnology.
Some such effects are mentioned below.
² Air, water and soil can be polluted by releasing particles of nanoscale, which are
used in nanotechnology, to the environment. This is known as nano pollution.
² Health problems can arise because of the collection of nanoparticles in human
and animal bodies.
² Calamitous situations in
the society may increase
because of the abundance
of nanoscale equipment.
² Severe
disasters
can
occur because of
the
production of chemical
and biological armaments of nanoscale.
Figure 16.26 - Imaginary nano armaments
114
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 115
Various precautionary measures can be suggested to minimize the ill effects of
nanotechnology.
² Release of nanoscale air pollutants with effluent smoke can be filtered using
nanofilters.
² Natural pollutants like arsenic can be removed from the environment by using
nanoscale particles.
² Unfavourable gases can be removed by using nanosensors which are sensitive
to those gases.
²
Judicial security can be provided by imposing new legislations to prevent ill
uses of nanotechnology.
Further information on nanotechnology
and applications can be obtained from
Sri Lanka Institute of Nanotechnology.
The address of
is
institute
Mahenwatta, Pitipana, Homagama.
this
Telephone – 011 4 650 500
Figure 16.27 - Sri Lanka Institute of
Nanotechnology
Summary
² One billionth of a meter is the nanometer (nm).
² Manufacturing of materials and components using particles of nanoscale and
their usage in known as nanotechnology.
² The best natural nanosystem is the cell, which is the structural and functional
unit of organisms.
² The self cleansing ability of lotus leaves because of the hydrophobic condition
on its surface is known as lotus effect.
² Non-wettable clothes, self-cleansing glass, self-cleansing paints are some
items produced using lotus effect.
² High standard productions are made in nanotechnology by positioning atoms
appropriately.
² Nanotechnology has contributed to a revolutionary development in various
fields.
² Misuse of nanotechnology can results in adverse effects.
116
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 117
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. A nanometer is considered as;
1. 10-3 m
2. 10-6 m
3. 10-9 m
4. 10-12 m
2. What are the instances below, that lotus effect is in action?
a - Water does not retain on lotus leaves.
b - Water does not retain on insect wings.
c - Dirt does not retain on surfaces painted with self cleaning paints.
1. a only
3. a and c only
2. a and b only
4. a, b and c all
3. The particles that are used in nanotechnology are;
1. The particles of 1 nm scale.
2. The particles of 1 nm to 10 nm scale.
3. The particles of 1 nm to 100 nm scale.
4. The particles of 1 nm to 1000 nm scale.
4. Who put forward the idea of nanotechnology to the world?
1. Eric Dexler
3. Francis Bacon
2. Albert Einstein
4. Richard Faynman
5. Which of the following, is not considered as a measure to be taken to minimize
the ill-effects caused by nanotechnology?
1. Limiting the use of nanotechnology.
2. Minimizing the spreading of nanoparticles using nanofilters
3. Acting against production of nano armaments
4. Testing the amount of nanoparticles in air using nanosensors.
116
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications 117
(02) Fill in the blanks.
1. Nanometer is .......................... of a meter.
2. What is the term used to describe the auto cleansing ability caused by the
presence of hydrophobic nature on a lotus leaf ? ..........................
3. Mention two fields where nanotechnology is used ..........................
4. Name two products in day-to-day life that are made using nanotechnology.
..........................
5. Mention two obstacles that come across, when a country is to use
nanotechnology ..........................
(03) Outbreak of nanotechnology is considered as the fifth industrial
revolution. This technology is not fully used up to date.
1. Identify what nanotechnology is.
2. Who introduced nanotechnology to the world?
3. Name two natural nanosystems found in the environment.
4. Describe lotus effect.
5. Name two products made, using lotus effect.
6. What is the element mainly used for nanotechnology activities?
Technical Terms
Nanometer
- kefkdaógrh
Nanotechnology
- kefkda ;dlaIKh
Nanoparticle
Lotus effect
- kefkda wxY=
- f,dagia wdprKh
Activated carbon
- il%Sh ldnka
Fullerene
Graphene
- *q,Íka
- .%e*Ska
- |÷Úõ «ØÓº
- |÷Úõ öuõÈÀ~m£®
- |÷Úõ xoUøPPÒ
- ÷»õmhì ÂøÍÄ
- öuõÈØ£k® Põ£ß
- ¦ÍŸß
- Qµ¥ß
118
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications
Science | Nanotechnology and its Applications PB
Lightning Accidents
7 1
Recall what you have learnt about the accidents caused by lightning in grade 7. Pay
your attention to the newspaper headlines on loss of lives and property caused by
bolts of lightning.
Female elephant and the baby
elephants caught in lightning
Central Anurdhapura
Specialist, Gamini jayasinghe
A female elephant with
her three baby elephants
were suspected
to be
dead with lightning. The
dead bodies were found
in Mahawilachchiya police
area to
Page 04.
2016.04.09 - Daily News
Lankadeepa 10.03.2005 Page 2
Island 29.04.2005 Page 4
Heard a burst with a big sound.
My son Wipula was found dead near the doorway.
Death of a 12 year old student in
Thissamaharamaya mother witness.
Rupavahini
Transmission stucked
due to lightning at
Piduruthalaggala.
Lankadeepa 17.10.2003 page 9
Lightning came along the trip switch.
28th of Wednesday, April 2005 Page 4
A loss of Rs. 20 lakhs to Rupavahini
Fig. 17.1 - Some newspaper reports on accidents caused by lightning
Lightning causes loss of human, animal and plant life. Only a small part of the
accidents brought about by lightning are reported by mass media.
Lightning claims loss of lives and property not only in Sri Lanka but also in other
countries.
In United States of America, it is reported that 100 deaths and nearly 500 get injured
within one year by lightning accidents. It has been observed that many lives were
lost due to negligence of the precautions for preventing lightning accidents.
Therefore, it is important to have an understanding about lightning.
There are seasons in which the lightning accidents are more frequent. To investigate
into it do the assignment 17.1.
Science | Lightning Accidents 119
PB
Science | Lightning Accidents
Assignment 17.1
Collect information regarding lightning and thunder occurred in this year.
Note down the months in which the lightning activity is highest.
According to the above newspaper reports (figure 17.1), it
has been observed that the lightning activity is at its peak
in the months of March-April and October-November.
Meteorologists call those two periods inter-monsoons.
In these inter-monsoon periods the temperature of the
atmosphere close to the Earth is high. Blowing of wind
is low. This increases the amount of water vapour in the
atmosphere. This water vapour rises up and also gets cooled
forming clouds. Cumulonimbus is the type of cloud that
contributes most to lightning. Generally, these are located
at a height of about 15 000 m from the ground level.
Figure 17.2 -
Cumulonimbus cloud
Assignment 17.2
Observe continuously the changes taking place in a cumulonimbus cloud formed
in the afternoon during the inter-monsoonal period and Observe the following.
y General increase in height
y Flattening of the top
y Getting darker from the bottom to top.
17.1 How lightning occurs
Clouds contain crystals of snow and tiny droplets of
water. Insides the clouds, wind blows fast from the
bottom to the top. This makes crystals and water droplets
rub each other. Because of this rubbing electrostatic
charges are formed in the crystals and water droplets.
Recall what you have learnt about the electrostatic
charges in grade 7. There are two types of electrostatic
charges as positive and negative. It has been discovered
that
in a cumulonimbus cloud positive charges
accumulate in the upper region whereas negative
charges get collected in the lower region.
120
Science | Lightning Accidents
Figure 17.3 - How charges are
distributed in a cumulonimbus
cloud
Science | Lightning Accidents 121
The air in a cloud is an insulator. Hence electrical charges do not flow easily through
air. Therefore, a large amount of electrical charges accumulate in the upper and
lower regions of a cloud. When, very large amounts of charges are developed like
this, a moment will arise where electricity can flow even through air. Then a jump
of electrical charges or an electric discharge occurs. This phenomenon is known as
lightning.
Types of lightning
Depending on the sites between which the charges jump, lightnings are classified
into three types.
y Cloud to cloud lightning
y Cloud to air lightning
y Cloud to ground lightning
Photographs illustrating the above three types of clouds are given below.
Cloud to cloud lightning
Cloud to air lightning
Cloud to ground lightning
Figure 17.4
120
Science | Lightning Accidents
Figure17.5 - Induction of positive
charges on ground due to negative
charges in the cloud
A jump of charges either between two regions of a
charged cloud or between two clouds with different
charges is referred to as a cloud to cloud lightning.
Sometimes a discharge of charges accumulated in
a cloud occurs to surrounding air. It is a cloud to
air lightning.
The most dangerous type is the cloud to ground
lightning. Let us find out how it occurs.
When a charged cloud positions itself above a
certain point on the Earth, positive charges are
induced on the ground due to the influence of the
negative charged accumulated in the lower part
of the cloud. When the amounts of charges in the
cloud and on Earth increase, at a certain moment
negative charges from the cloud, jump to Earth.
This is called a cloud to ground lightning.
Science | Lightning Accidents 121
Lightning and thunder
The voltage of a cloud to ground lightning is about 10 million volts. In such a
lightning a current of nearly 25 000 amperes flows. The voltage of an LED lamp
used in houses is 230 volts while the current flowing through it is less than even 0.1
amperes. Hence, you will be able to understand how high is the voltage and current
of a lightning.
When such a large current flows through air in a very short time (about
10 milliseconds), air is heated up to a very high temperature. This temperature is
about 30 000 0C. It is five times the temperature of the sun's surface.
Due to the high air temperature, around the lightning current expands instantaneously
(same thing happens when a cracker explodes). When air expands at once like this,
first a wave is generated followed by a sound wave. The result of the sound wave
is the thunder.
In lightning, both light and sound are born simultaneously. But, light is seen first
and sound is heard afterwards. The reason for this is that the speed of light is very
high whereas the speed of sound is much less than the speed of light. Since the
speed of light is very high, light travel from the place where lightning occurs to us
is negligibly small. Sound takes more time to reach us. That is why sound reaches
us later.
For extra knowledge
The speed of light is 300 000 000 m s-1 (3x108 m s-1) and the speed of sound is
330 m s-1.
During a lightning, if time is measured from the moment of observing light to the
moment at which the sound is heard, the distance to the point at which the lightning
occurred can be calculated approximately.
For extra knowledge
As the speed of sound is 330 m s-1, it takes about three seconds to travel a
distance of 1km (1000 m). So, if the time between the observation of light and
hearing of sound (in seconds) is divided by three, we get the distance to the
point of lightning in kilometers.
e.g. Let us assume that the sound was heard 12 seconds after the
lightning. Then, the distance to the place of lightning is 12/3 = 4 km.
Let us do the activity 17.2 to produce an electric spark (a teacher demonstration).
122
Science | Lightning Accidents
Science | Lightning Accidents 123
Activity 17.2
² Produce an electric spark using the induction coil
available in the laboratory.
² Observe the production of light and sound while
²
doing it.
If an induction coil is not available in the school, a
spark plug in a motorcycle can be removed from the
engine and the way a spark is
produced in it can be observed.
Figure 17.6 - Producing
sparks by the induction coil
Caution
Here, the participation of the teacher or
an adult is essential.
Figure 17.7 - Sparking in a
spark plug
In the above activity you would have observed an electric spark. You could have
also observed the production of light and sound. The length of that spark is only a
few millimetres or centimetres. But, the length of the spark produced in a lightning
bolt would be several kilometers. Accordingly, you may understand that the thunder
accompanying is also intense.
How lightnings get earthed
There are four ways by which lightnings get earthed harming humans and animals
and damaging buildings.
y Direct strikes
y Side flashes
y Contact voltages
y Step potentials
Direct strikes
A strike of a lightning on a solitary man, tree or a building
standing on a flat land is known as a direct strike.
If a human is struck by a direct lightning, it would
seriously affect the person because the lightning current
flows to the Earth through his/her body.
Figure 17.8 - A direct strike
Science | Lightning Accidents 123
122
Science | Lightning Accidents
Side flashes
A bolt of lightning hitting a tall building or a free passes into
the Earth through it and during its passage may side-step from
it and get earthed through the body of a man standing near by.
The reason for this is that the flow of the lightning current
through a human body is easier than its flow through a building
or a tree.
Figure 17.9 - Side flashes
Contact voltages
Being struck by a lightning at a time of its production because
of touching domestic electrical appliances or using cellular
phones is known as a contact voltage.
Besides, a person in contact with a tree at a time of the
occurrence of a lightning may also fall
prey to it when it hits the tree. This is
also a contact voltage.
Figure 17.10 - A contact
voltage
Step potentials
When a lightning strikes a building, a tree or the ground the
lightning current spreads in every direction from that place.
Suppose a person or an animal is standing within such a spread
area. The lightning current that enter the body of that man or
the animal from one leg will pass through the other leg. This
phenomenon is called step potential.
Figure 17.11 – Step
potential
The longer the distance between the two feet, the higher is the potential difference
and hence the intensity of the current too. That is the reason why it is safer to keep
the two feet closer at a time of lightning.
An ox is hurt more than a human by a step potential. This is because the distance
between the fore limb and hind limb of an ox is greater than that between the two
feet of a human. This increases the potential difference and hence the current flow
through the body of the ox. Consequently the damage caused is also greater.
According to the newspaper reports shown to you at the beginning of this lesson,
it would be clear to you that a lot of damage is caused on human, animals and
property by lightning. Though a systematic calculation has not been carried out,
the loss of property due to lightning per year in Sri Lanka may amount to billions
of rupees.
Therefore, measures should be taken to minimize the losses caused by lightning.
124
Science | Lightning Accidents
Science | Lightning Accidents 125
17.2 Prevention of lightning accidents
Some precautions that can be taken to prevent accidents
caused by lightning are given below.
² Fixing lightning conductors for tall buildings and
²
maintaining them properly.
Installing earth wires properly in domestic electrical
circuits
² Disconnecting all electrical appliances from the
circuit and keeping them away from sockets in
situations in which lightning is likely
² Disconnecting
television antennas
the
television set and keeping them outside the house
when there is likelihood of lightning.
Identifying safe sites in advance when planning
outdoor activities.
from
²
Point
Broad
copper
strip
Earth connector
Figure 17.12 - A lightning
conductor
Ensuring safety from lightning accidents
Following precautions can be taken to minimize the accidents caused by lightning.
For extra knowledge
The lightning conductor was invented by
Benjamin Franklin.
Benjamin Franklin
² Not staying in open areas such as playgrounds, tea plantations and paddy
fields
² Refraining from using equipment such as mamaty and crowbars
²
If it is required to stay in an open area keeping feet closer and being in
squatting position
² Wearing dry shoes or standing on insulator materials
² Not staying on trees or high lands
² Keeping away from the foliage if it is required to stay near a tree
² Staying away from flag posts, wire meshes, wire fences etc.
² Staying seated or reclined lessening the height above the ground
² Being seated if it is required to stay in an open boat
² Limiting the use of landline phones as much as possible
² Refraining from using electric irons, refrigerators, electric ovens etc.
A fully-enclosed vehicle is very safe place to be in, when lightning occurs. Be
sure not to touch interior metallic parts in the vehicle.
Lightning victims do not carry an electrical charge and are safe to handle.
124
Science | Lightning Accidents
Science | Lightning Accidents 125
Figure 17.13 - Not staying in an open areas when
lightning
Figure 17.14 - Avoid the use of landline
phones when lightning
First aid for a person struck by lightning
²
²
²
If the limbs are benumbed bring them back to normally by massaging
If respiration has stopped, give artificial respirations
If the heart beat has stopped, massage the heart
It is very important to have a practice in artificial respiration and heart
massaging. It is useful for you in day to day life.
² Take the patient to the hospital as soon as possible. Give first aid while taking
the patient to the hospital
Summary
² Lightning is a natural disaster affecting Sri Lanka. It causes loss of human
²
lives, animal lives and property.
Lightning occurs mainly due to the accumulation of electrostatic charges in
cumulonimbus clouds.
When the clouds heavily laden with electric charges they get discharged.
Lightnings are classified according to the way of discharge.
²
²
² Cloud of ground lightnings are the most harmful. They are further classified
²
²
²
²
according to how they get earthed.
In a lightning bolt, flow of a high current occurs instantaneously due to the
high potential difference created between the clouds and the Earth.
Thunder is the result of sudden expansion of air due to intense heat generated
in an electric discharge.
In a lightning through both light and thunder are produced simultaneously,
an observer at a distance sees light first and hears the sound afterwards.
The damage caused by lightning can be minimized by suitable precautions
and following safety measures in the occasions of lightning.
126
Science | Lightning Accidents
Science | Lightning Accidents 127
Exercises
(01) State whether the following statements are true (√) or false (×).
i. Exact predictions cannot be made about the lightning strikes.
ii. Only water vapour can be seen in clouds.
iii. It is not suitable to be on a tall tree in an occasion where there is
a risk of lightning.
iv. Even a person inside a house can be hurt by a lightning.
v. In a lightning bolt, both light and sound are produced at the same
time.
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
(02) Match the pairs correctly.
i. Direct strike
a. Hurting a person staying near a building when a
lightning hits that building
ii. Contact voltage b. A man standing under a tree being struck by part of
a lightning that hits the tree
iii. Side flash
c. A lightning hitting a person staying alone in a flat
land
iv. Step potential
d. A lightning hitting a man leaning against a tree or a
person using a cellular phone
(03) Fill in the blanks of the sentences given using the following words.
(cloud to air, cloud to ground, cloud to cloud, large, greater)
i. A ……………………….. lightning comes from a cloud to Earth.
ii. ……………………….. lightnings are produced between clouds.
iii. The lightnings occurring between clouds and air are…………………..
iv. The temperature of a lightning is ……………………….. than the
temperature of the sun's surface.
v. A ……………………….. amount of heat is generated by a lightning.
(04) Match the following sentences with the blank spaces A,B,C and D in
the concept map given as approximate.
i. Air gets heated up and expands suddenly
ii. Charges jump within a cloud, between cloud or from a cloud to
( )
( )
ground.
iii. Electrical charges accumulate in a cloud.
iv. Air with water vapour moving up gets cooled to form clouds.
( )
( )
126
Science | Lightning Accidents
Science | Lightning Accidents 127
Air with water vapour rises up
A
The cloud takes the shape of an anvil
Rain
Lightnings
Thunder
Electric discharge
Turns first into shock waves and
then into sound waves
B
C
Turns into an electric current with large
amount of accumulation of charges
Air around the lightning current is
strongly heated up
D
Technical Terms
Discharge
Lightning
Thunder
Inter monsoon
Cumulo nimbus clouds
Snow crystals
Static electric charges
Cloud to cloud lightning
Cloud to ground lightning
Cloud to air lightning
Induction coil
Lightning rod
Direct strike
Side flash
Step potential
Contact voltage
Shock wave
£¸ÁU PõØÖ Põ»¨£Sv
vµÒ •QÀ
£Û¨ £Î[SPÒ
{ø» ªß÷ÚØÓ[PÒ
- ªßÛÓUP®
-
úi¾ckh
- ªßÚÀ
-
wl=K
- Ci•ÇUP®
-
.s.=reu
-
-
wka;¾ fudaiï
-
- leá jeys j,dl=¿
-
-
ysu iaMál
iaÓ;s úoHq;a wdfrdaamK -
-
-
j,d wl=Kq
-
mDÓú wl=Kq
-
jd - wl=Kq
-
fm%arK o`.rh
-
wl=Kq ikakdhlh
- Rcq wl=Kq
-
md¾Yaúl wl=Kq
-
mshjr wl=Kq
-
iam¾Yl wl=Kq
- lïmk ;rx.
- •QÀ ªßÚÀ
¦Â ªßÚÀ
-
£i•øÓ ªßÚÀ
-
- yshØ _¸Ò
- ªßÚØ Phzv
÷|µiz uõUS
-
£UP¨ £õ´a\À
-
£i•øÓ AÊzu®
-
öuõkøP ÷ÁõÀØÓÍÄ
-
- AvºÁø»
128
Science | Lightning Accidents
Science | Lightning Accidents
PB
18
Natural Disasters
The losses brought about on humans, animals and property by a natural process
without the interference of man is named a natural disaster.
There is a number of natural disasters affecting Sri Lanka. Of them, here we study
about the below mentioned natural disasters.
² Cyclones
² Earthquakes
² Tsunami
² Wild fires
18.1 Cyclones
When the pressure of the air at a certain place in the atmosphere closer to the Earth's
surface drops below the pressure around that place, a low pressure area is created.
If this low pressure situation develop further, it becomes a depression. If situation
develops further it gives rise to a cyclone.
Figure 18.1 (a) – Satellite picture showing the
movements of clouds during a cyclone
Figure 18.1 (b) – Movement of air during a
cyclone
Factors that cause cyclones
² Existence of a large oceanic area and its temperature being above 27 0C to a
depth of 60 m.
² Occurrence of convection current in the atmosphere
² Minimal tendency of the horizontally blowing wind to sweep vertically
PB
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 129
² Location of the point at which the depression is closer to the equator. (cyclones
are not formed on the equator)
²
Increasing humidity of the atmosphere beginning from surface of the ocean
to higher atmospheric levels (higher than 60%).
As cyclones are born on meeting the above conditions, they are restricted only to
some oceanic regions on the Earth.
For extra knowledge
Types of cyclones
” The cyclones formed in the North and South Asian oceans are known as
tropical cyclones.
” The cyclones generated in the Northern Pacific Ocean are called as typhoons.
” Cyclones produced in the North Atlantic Ocean are termed as hurricanes.
Structure of a cyclone
In addition to the circulation,
air rises up in the central part
of the whirl of the cyclone.
This upward movement of air
gives rise to a cylindrical cloud
wall. The central part of the
whirlwind is called as the eye.
It would have spread within a
region of 30 - 60 km from the
centre of the whirl. This eye is
a region with little wind and
free of rain and clouds. In satellite photographs this appears as a black circle.
Dense cirrus overcast
Figure 18.2 – Cross sectional structure of a cyclone
Eye
Eye wall
Rainbands
The cylindrically arranged cluster of clouds around the eye is known as the eye
wall. In this region heavy rains and fast blowing winds occur. Due to the eye wall,
a few spiral bounds of clouds can be seen. In these regions too, heavy and speedy
winds occur.
Cyclone is the main mechanism that distributes the huge solar energy received by
the regions close to the equator of the globe. Cyclones originating time to time in
Indian, Pacific and Atlantic oceans provide the factors essential for the life of plants
and animals on the Earth. Though in nature, cyclones is a favourable phenomenon
like this, today more attention is focused on the disasters brought about by it.
130
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 131
An experience of a cyclone
The date was 26th December 2000. It was a sunny day for Trincomalee
town. The residents of the town were involved in their daily routing as
usual. Although the weather forecasts of that day had informed that a
cyclone would occur, some seemed not to be concerned about it.
At about eight o'clock a black cloud appeared from the sea side. Before
half an hour passed, a fast blowing wind swept across the town. At the
same time it started to rain heavily. Roofs of buildings flew away with
the wind. Trees were uprooted. Electricity was cut off. Residents of the
town ran to safer places.
After some time rain stopped and the wind also subsided. Some people
came out from the safe places. But, again a strong wind started to blow
in the opposite direction as earlier. Rain started again. Buildings which
were not destroyed by the wind which blew first were devastated by
this second.
Given below are numerical data about the losses caused by the cyclone
described above.
- 170 419
² Number of families hit
² Number of houses fully damaged
² Number of houses partly damaged
² Amount of cultivated land destroyed - 20 810 acres
² Number of deaths
² Loss caused to the national economy - Rs. 1500 million
- 20 860
- 57 273
- 17
Now let us compare the above experiences with the action of a cyclone. Within the
cyclone winds, the whirl is very fast and that whirl moves in a certain direction with
a certain speed.
After a strong blowing of wind from one direction, comes a state of tranquility.
That is when the eye of the cyclone passes through that point. When the other part
of the whirl passes that point, a speedy wind, as was the one blew first, blows in the
opposite direction.
130
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 131
Table 18.1 - Information about some cyclones that affected Sri Lanka in the past 50 years
Year
Date
1964
1978
1992
2000
2008
2016
22 December
22 November
12 November
26 December
25 November
15 May
Area from which the cyclone
entered Sri Lanka
Trincomalee
Batticaloa
Pottuvil
Trincomalee
Eastern coast
Eastern coast
Number of deaths
More than 1000
915
04
17
15
101
According to the above table, what are the months in which most of the cyclones
affected to Sri Lanka had occurred? From which areas had cyclones entered to
Sri Lanka most?
It may be clear to you that most of the cyclones that defected Sri Lanka had occurred
in November and December and they had entered Sri Lanka from the Eastern coast.
In 1978, the death toll due to cyclones was 915. However, since warnings could be
given because of the development of technology, the number of deaths could be
reduced in subsequent cyclones.
For extra knowledge
Most of the storms affecting Sri Lanka are born in the Bay of Bengal.
Let us do the activity 18.1 to demonstrate the movement of air during cyclones,
using water.
Activity 18.1
You will need :- Two identical transparent plastic bottles, water, gum tape
small pieces of paper or colourant
Method :-
y Take two identical, transparent plastic bottles.
y Fill about 3/4 of one of them with water. Colour the water or put some
pieces of paper into water.
y Place the mouth of the empty bottle on the mouth of the bottle containing
water and connect those two tightly with gum tape.
y Now rotate the apparatus slowly in anticlockwise.
132
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 133
You will be able to understand how air
moves during a cyclone by the movement
of water in the bottle placed on top.
During the past century, 13 cyclones have
entered to Sri Lanka from the Eastern coast
of the country. Among those cyclones, three
were very powerful cyclones.
Figure 18.3
Figure 18.4 - Paths of cyclones which entered
Sri Lanka from 1901 to 2000
Figure 18.5 - A cyclone
Assignment 18.1
Study the above map and prepare a list of districts in Sri Lanka which are prone
to cyclones.
Using high technology, the Department of Meteorology keeps vigilance over
the cyclones around 24 hours. In occasions of a probable cyclonic situation
to Sri Lanka, the latest information about it are communicated to the relevant
government institutions. The telephone number of the Department of Meteorology
is 011 2 686 686.
132
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 133
18.2 Earthquakes
An earthquake is a jolt or shoulder like movement of the Earth's surface. Less
violent earthquakes are known as tremors.
Earthquakes and Earth tremors are caused by releasing of the energy stored in
the Earth's crust.
Earthquakes bring heavy damages to man-made creations on Earth.
Figure 18.6 – Photographs of the same area before and after the Earthquake
In order to understand how earthquakes are happening, we need to know about the
structure of the Earth. The figure 18.7 shows the internal structure of the Earth.
The Earth is composed of three main structures.
Crust
Upper mantle
Lower mantle
Outer core
Inner
core
Figure 18.7 – Internal structure
of the Earth
1. Crust
2. Mantle
3. Core
Upper
mantle
Lower
mantle
Outer
core
Inner
core
Evidences support the fact that the crust, the
topmost layer of the Earth is composed of a
number of tectonic plates which move relative to
one another. The Earth's crust consists of a few
large tectonic plates. They can be identified by
the following map (figure 18.8).
134
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 135
Eurasian
Plate
North American
Plate
Philippine
Plate
Equator
Cocos
Plate
Caribbean
Plate
Australian
Plate
Nazca
Plate
South
American
Plate
African
Plate
Eurasian
Plate
Arabian
Plate
Indian
Plate
Australian
Plate
Antarctic
Plate
Figure 18.8 – The map of tectonic plates
The tectonic plates which form the Earth's crust move relative to one another. By
the activity 18.2 you can understand how this happens.
Activity 18.2
You will need :- Plate or a shallow basin, water, colourant, piece of styrofoam
Method :-
y Pour water into a plate or a shallow basin. Add some colour to water.
y Cut a polystyrene sheet into pieces and float them on water.
Figure 18.9 – Pieces of styrofoam floating on water
y Now shake the container gently.
y Observe the way the piece of polystyrene move.
134
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 135
The movement of the pieces of polystyrene corresponds to the way the tectonic
plates move on semi-solid magma in the upper part of the mantle.
How tectonic plates move
It has been identified that there are three ways of movement of tectonic plates
relative to one another at the boundaries.
• Divergent border
• Convergent border
• Slip border
Divergent border
At this border, the two tectonic plates move away from each other.
Figure 18.10 – Illustration of a divergent border
Figure 18.11 – Mid Atlantic Ridge
At divergent borders, magma in the upper mantle rises up between the two tectonic
plates and therefore a new crust is created. Most of such tectonic plate borders are
located in the oceanic floor.
e.g. Mid Atlantic ridge
Convergent border
At this border, two tectonic plates collide and one plate moves underneath the other.
Volcanoes erupt in the regions in which these movements occur.
e.g. Saint Helen's mount (Figure 18.13)
Juan de
Fuca Plate
St. Helen's
mountain peak
North
American
Plate
Increase of
magma
Figure 18.12 – Illustration of a convergent border
Figure 18.13 – St. Helen's mount
136
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 137
Slip border
At this border, the two tectonic plates move away from each other while being in
contact.
Sometimes, the tectonic plates cram into each other during the movements. Violent
earthquakes may happen when lot of energy is collected during such movements.
e.g. Saint Andrea's fault (Figure 18.15)
Figure 18.14 – A slip border
Figure 18.15 – Saint Andrea's fault
By the activity 18.3, you may have an understanding about how the tectonic plates
move on the Earth's crust.
Activity 18.3
You will need :- A boiled egg
Method :-
y To Demonstrate the Earths' crust and the movements of
tectonic plates,
y Tap a boiled egg on the table and make several cracks on it.
y The shell of the egg corresponds to the Earth's crust and the
egg white underneath it, corresponds to the upper mantle.
y Colour the boundaries of the cracks using a marker. Take
Figure 18.16
the egg onto the palm and squeeze it gently, so that the edges move back and
forth.
When squeezed, it can be seen that at some pints of the cracks the pieces of shells
move apart. Those points correspond to divergent borders. At some other places it
appears that some pieces come closer. Such places illustrate convergent borders.
In some other places it appears that the pieces of the shell move forward and
backward relatively. Those places correspond to slip borders.
136
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 137
For extra knowledge
Compared to the Earth, the thickness of the crust is 2% of its diameter. Compared
to the diameter of an average egg, the thickness of the shell is also 2% of it.
Intensity of earthquakes
At the points at which the tectonic plates have colloid impact, the layers of rocks
bend. When the force exerted to bend them exceeds the yield point of the rocks, the
rocky layers break. This point of breakage is the focus of the earthquakes. The point
on Earth above the focus is the epicenter.
Epicenter
Surface waves
Surface waves
Body waves
Body waves
Focus
Figure 18.17 – Focus and epicenter of an earthquake
Seismic waves spread in all directions from the focus of an earthquake. These
waves convey energy along the surface of the Earth and also through the interior
of the Earth.
The strength of these seismic waves can be measured by the seismometers installed
at various places of the Earth. The apparatus which automatically records the
information related to seismic waves is called the seismograph.
Figure 18.18 – A Seismograph and its records (Seismograms)
The scale that is calculated on the basis of the information recorded by the
seismograph and the damage inflicted to buildings, ground and humans is called
the Richter scale.
This scale has been introduced by Charles F. Richter in 1953.
138
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 139
Table 18.3 gives a short description of the intensities of earthquakes and their results
as against the Richter scales values.
Table 18.3 - Intensities of earthquakes and their results
Richter scale value
2.0 - 3.5
3.5 - 5.5
5.5 - 7.3
7.4 - 8.0
above 8.0
Result
Not felt by human but is recorded in the seismograph
Felt by everybody
Buildings may be destroyed
A big damage may be caused
Can cause a complete destructtion
Worlds' regions prone to earthquakes
Study well the map (figure 18.19) indicating the regions where strong earthquakes
occurred in the world.
Eurasian Plate
North American Plate
Eurasian Plate
Ring of fire
Cocos
Plate
Indo-Australian
Plate
Pacific Plate
Ara
bia
Plate
n
Nazca
Plate
South
American
Plate
African Plate
Figure 18.19 – Map indicating the regions subject to strong earthquakes
Antarctic Plate
From the above map, it may be clear to you that earthquakes have occurred mostly
in the borderland regions. Of them, too most of the earthquakes have broken out in
the region called 'Pacific Ring of Fire'. From the map it can be seen that, this region
is the border of the very large Pacific tectonic plate.
138
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 139
For extra knowledge
Table 18.4 shows the information on strong earthquakes that took place during the
past few years. Table 18.4
Value on the Richter scale
Date
6.4
9.1
6.4
8.6
7.6
6.3
8.0
7.9
6.3
8.1
7.6
7.0
8.8
6.9
7.7
6.1
7.9
6.9
6.9
6.4
6.6
7.1
6.2
7.8
7.3
7.5
7.8
6.2
6.4
2004.02.24
2004.12.26
2005.02.22
2005.03.28
2005.10.08
2006.05.26
2007.08.15
2008.05.12
2009.04.06
2009.09.29
2009.09.30
2010.01.12
2010.02.27
2010.04.13
2010.10.25
2011.02.21
2011.03.11
2011.03.24
2011.09.18
2012.08.11
2013.04.20
2013.10.15
2014.08.03
2015.04.25
2015.05.12
2015.10.26
2016.04.16
2016.08.24
2016.02.05
Region/Country of
occurrence
Morocco
Sumatra
Iran
Sumatra
Pakistan
Java Islands
Peru
China
Italy
Samoa Islands
Sumatra
Haiti Islands
Chile
China
Indonesia
New Zealand
Japan
Myanmar
India-Nepal border
Iran
China
Philippine
China
Nepal
Nepal
Afghanistan
Ecuador
Italy
Taiwan
Number of deaths
631
250 000
612
1 313
87 000
5 782
519
69 197
308
189
1 115
160 000
1 525
698
408
185
18 184
150
111
306
193
222
617
9 018
218
398
673
297
117
Study the above table and find out the following information.
1. How many earthquakes have occurred during past 13 years which above 7.4
in Richter scale?
2. What are the countries in which, those earthquakes occurred?
3. What is the country in which, the highest number of earthquakes have occurred?
140
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 141
Assignment 18.2
Find the tectonic plate borders of above countries based on the location and
prepare a table. Seek assistance of the Geography teacher if required.
e.g. Sumatra Islands are located on the border between Indo-Australian
plate and Eurasian plate
Human activities that would cause earthquakes
Recently, scientists have observed that, in addition to natural causes, some activities
of human could also be the reasons for earthquakes.
y Testing nuclear weapons underneath Earth
y Drilling Earth to great depths to mine oil and minerals
y Erecting dams and constructing large water reservoirs
y Constructing very large buildings of great heights and weights
18.3 Tsunami
On the 26th December 2004 we had to face the most ruinous natural disaster which
affected Sri Lanka in recent times. It was the tsunami disaster. A part of a newspaper
article published 12 years after the incident is given in the figure 18.20.
26th of Friday, December 2016
12 years for Tsunami
'Tsunami' train stops at Paraliya for 5 minutes for the
commemoration of 2004 Tsunami.
Figure 18.20
In this disaster, 250 000 people died in countries bordering the Indian Ocean. In
Sri Lanka about 40 000 were died. The way that tsunami was formed, has been
explained by geologists as follows.
That day at 6.58 a.m. in Sri Lankan time, an earthquake of Richter scale value 9.1
occurred in the sea bed near Sumatra Island of Indonesia. The process taking place
at a convergent border occurred there. Indian tectonic plate moved underneath the
Burmese tectonic plate. Owing to the upward moment of the Burmese tectonic
plate and the vast amount of energy released by the earthquake, the oceanic water
Science | Natural Disasters 141
140
Science | Natural Disasters
raised up. The tsunami wave created by it was spreaded throughout the Indian ocean
at a speed greater than 800 kilometers per hour.
Bangladesh
India
Myanmar (Burma)
Bay of
Bengal
Thailand
Sri Lanka
Maldives
Malaysia
Indian Ocean
Sumatra
Indonesia
Figure 18.21 –The way of tsunami wave spread in 2004
Let us do the activity 18.4 to demonstrate an event of tsunami.
Activity 18.4
You will need :- A rectangular basin, air filled
balloons with different sizes, a pin
Method :-
²
²
Pour water about 2/3 the volume of a rectangular
basin.
Sink an air-filled balloon at a narrow end of it
and burst it by piercing with a pin.
² Observe the waves formed in water.
² Burst small, medium and large balloons like this and observe if there is any
Figure 18.22
difference in waves created.
Incidents causing tsunami
² Earthquakes occurring in the oceanic bed
² Volcanic eruptions in the ocean floor
² Earth slips in the ocean floor
² Falling of a large meteorite to sea
Of the above, the greatest ruin would be caused by the fall of a gigantic meteorite
to the sea. Such a devastation may also be caused by the collision of an asteroid
with the Earth.
142
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 143
Table 18.5 shows information regarding tsunami occurred during the past 20 years.
Table 18.5 - Tsunami occurred during the past 20 years
Date
1994.06.03
1998.07.17
2004.12.26
2006.07.17
2006.11.15
2007.04.02
2009.09.29
2010.02.27
2010.10.25
2011.03.11
2013.02.06
2014.04.02
2015.09.16
2016.11.13
Region/Country in which the
tsunami occurred
Indonesia
Papua New Guinea
Sumatra Islands
Java Islands
Kuril Islands
Solomon Islands
Samoa Islands
Chile, Argentina
Sumatra Islands
Japan
Solomon Islands
Chile
Chile
New Zealand
Strength (height of waves)
5 m
10.5 m
50 m
21 m
2 m
12 m
14 m
2 m
3 m
2 m
1 m
2 m
4 m
2 m
Study the above table and answer the following questions.
1. According to this table, name the country that was hit by the highest number of
tsunami disasters.
2. What are the countries that were subjected to tsunami disasters twice?
3. What was the date that the tsunami with highest height occurred?
4. What are the effects caused by the tsunami mentioned in question number 3 to
Sri Lanka?
Assignment 18.3
Find the margins of crustal plates where the above countries are located and
prepare a table. Get the assistance of the Geography teacher if required.
e.g. Chile is situated at the boundaries of Nazca plate and the South
American plate
Nature of a tsunami wave
Tsunami waves are a type of water waves. Figure 18.23 illustrates the characteristics
of a normal water wave.
142
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 143
Crest
Wavelength
Crest
e
d
u
t
i
l
p
m
A
Trough
Trough
Figure 18.23 – Characteristics of a normal water wave
A water wave comprises of an alternate series of crests and troughs. The distance
between two successive crests or troughs is called the wavelength. The depth from
the mid point of a wave to its crest is known as the amplitude.
Figure 18.24 shows how the wavelength, amplitude and the speed of tsunami waves
change from deep sea to shallow sea.
Figure 18.24 – How wave length, and speed of the tsunami waves change when they
move from deep sea to shallow sea
The affect of the move which occur in sea surface depend on the depth of water
column. In the deep sea, the speed of tsunami waves is high. Their wavelength is
also high. But, the amplitude or the height of the waves is low. Therefore, tsunami
waves cannot be identified in deep sea. Further the ships streaming in deep sea are
not damaged by the tsunami waves.
In the shallow sea, the speed of tsunami waves decreases. Their wavelength also
decreases. But, the amplitude or the height of the waves increases. Hence the boats
near the coast are damaged by the tsunami waves.
In tsunami waves, the trough first approaches the shore. Then the sea is drawn
backwards. This is a forwarding of an imminent tsunami.
144
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 145
Coral reefs and mangroves retard the speed of tsunami waves. Therefore, the coral
reefs and mangroves should be protected live without causing damage to them.
Since there is a possibility of tsunami following an earthquake, people should be
vigilant about them. Investigations must be made about the sites which have been
already damaged by tsunami and the people living in such areas should be made
aware about them.
18.4 Wild fires
Wild fires have occurred out in jungles from the distant past. When a forest is
dry, wild fires may erupt due to natural reasons such as lightning or setting fire
deliberately or by mistake.
Figure 18.25 – A wild fire
There are three factors that should be met for a fire to break out.
²
²
²
Availability of a combustible substance
Availability of a supporter of combustion or oxygen
Heating the combustible substance to the ignition temperature
Several factors are affecting the spread of wild fires.
²
²
²
²
²
Existence of dry plant leaves or tree stems as the combustible materials
Prevalence of a high temperature
Low humidity (water vapour content) in air
Profuse supply of oxygen to the fire due to blowing wind
Slopy land that helps upward spread of the fire
144
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 145
A wild fire is a terrifying scene. In a wild fire, a very tall column of fire moves
forward very fast. The smoke produced in this, rises to a height of thousands of
meters in the atmosphere. More and more fires also would break out because fire
flames are carried through air to distant places from the fire.
Plants and animals have been damaged due to wild fires. Organisms are adversely
affected even by the smoke produced by wild fires. It has been reported that
respiratory difficulties and even deaths have occurred in certain instances. In
Sri Lanka approximately 4 000 acres of land has been destroyed in 2016 owing to
wild fires.
18.5 The relationship between
increase in global warming and natural disasters
During the past 100 years, the average temperature of the world has been increased.
This condition is known as global warming. The graph in figure 18.26 shows how
the average temperature changed from 1860 to 2000 in the world.
)
C
0
(
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T
l
l
a
b
o
G
e
g
a
r
e
v
A
Figure 18.26 – The change of average temperature from 1860 to 2000 in the world
Year
From the above graph it is clear that the average temperature of the world has
increased during this period. Scientists indicate that a main reason for this increase
in temperature is the greenhouse effect.
Generally, during day time the Earth gets heated up by sun rays. During night, heat
is lost to space, so the Earth gets cooled. But, since the carbon dioxide gas and
water vapour in the atmosphere absorb and retain a part of the heat released from
the Earth, they help to keep the Earth warm. This is called the greenhouse effect.
This effect creates favourable environment for the living beings on the Earth.
146
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 147
However, because of the increase in the
concentration of greenhouse gases such
as carbon dioxide, methane, Nitrogen
dioxide sulfur dioxide, the temperature
of the Earth is gradually increasing. In
addition to the gases mentioned above,
ozone and chlorofluorocarbons (CFC)
also contribute to the greenhouse effect.
The ways by which greenhouse
gases are added to the environment
Figure 18.27 - Green house effect
² Release of carbon dioxide by volcanic eruptions, thermal power plants and
combustion of fuels in vehicles
² Release of methane from heaps of garbage, marshes etc.
² Release of CFC from refrigerators, air conditioners etc.
Global warming and cyclones
The graph in figure 18.28 indicates the change in the number of the incidence of
cyclones in the world from 1850 to 2015.
d
e
r
u
c
c
o
s
e
n
o
l
c
y
c
s
e
m
i
t
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
146
Science | Natural Disasters
Year
Figure 18.28 – Incidence of cyclones from 1850 to 2015
The above graph brings to light the fact that, the number of the events of cyclones
in the world has gradually increased during this period.
Science | Natural Disasters 147
Figure 18.29 is a histogram which depicts how the number of natural disasters
changed during the period 1980-2010.
Number of disastrous events
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Geophysical events (earthquakes,
tsunami, volcanic activities)
Meteorological events (cyclones)
Hydrological events (floods, earth slips)
Climatological events (extreme
temperatures, droughts, wildfires)
Figure 18.29 - Histogram which depicts the number of natural disasters during 1980-2010
The chart indicates that the number of natural disasters has gradually increased
during this period.
From the above information it is clear that, there is a relationship between the
increase in global warming and the increase in the number of natural disasters.
For extra knowledge
² During the period from 2000 to 2009, natural disasters have occurred three
times more than the number of those occurred from 1980 to 1989.
² Globally, the number of natural disasters reported in 1970 was 78, whereas
the number of those reported in 2004 was 348.
² During the period from 1980 to 2009, the number of natural disasters
related to weather has increased by 80%.
What we can do to prevent the increase in global warming
² Forestation and conservation of forests
² Usage of public transport instead of private transport
² Consumption of more plant food and obtaining them from areas close to the
residence
² Economizing electricity - using energy saving electrical appliances
² Reducing the amount of materials consumed daily
² Living a simple life style without using more materials
² Raising the awareness of others about the above facts
148
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 149
Summary
² The damage caused by natural disasters can be minimized by keeping
vigilant over one's environment, use of standard safety methods and
maintaining connection with media of communication.
² Because of the development of depressions in the atmosphere, cyclones
and storms are created.
² Lot of damages to property and loss of lives have been brought about by
cyclones from time to time in Sri Lanka.
² Earthquakes would be resulted when the crustal plates of the Earth move
relative to one another.
² Tsunami is mainly caused by the lifting of oceanic water due to the
earthquakes in the sea bed.
² Earthquakes and tsunami mainly occur in the regions associating with the
borders of Earths' tectonic plates.
²
²
In other countries wildfires break out due to natural causes. In Sri Lanka,
the wildfires are occurred mostly due to human activities.
It is considered that, the number of natural disasters increased due to the
increase in global warming.
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. Which ocean associated with the earthquakes and tsunami that occur mostly?
1' Atlantic
3' Indian
2' Pacific
4' Arctic
2. The factor /factors causing a tsunami is/are,
1' Earthquakes
3' Fall of meteorites
2' Volcanic eruptions
4' Above all
148
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 149
3. Which option indicates the tectonic plate movements shown in the following
figures respectively.
1' Convergent, divergent, slip border
2' Divergent, convergent, slip border
3' Slip border, convergent, divergent
4' Slip border, divergent, convergent
(02) Mark whether the following statements are true (√) or false (×).
1' Mangroves near the sea shore reduces the speed of tsunami waves. ( )
2' Greenhouse effect has an influence on the rise of sea level.
( )
3' In deep sea, the height of tsunami waves is about thousand meters. ( )
4' Cyclones occur on the equator.
5' The direction of spin of the cyclones occurring in the Northern
hemisphere is anticlockwise.
( )
( )
(03) Insert the words/phrases given below into the rectangular boxes of the
following concept map as appropriate
is atte
ntiv
e a
b
o
ut
are countries
Tsunami
highly affected by
y
d b
e
y
o
s t r
e
i s d
y
d b
e
s
u
a
a r e c
y
d b
e
s
u
a
c
a r e
are caused by
are caused by
Words/phrases
Volcanic eruptions, coastal environment, earthquakes, earthslips under sea, fall
of meteorites, Chile, Indonesia, Japan, Geology and Mines Bureau
150
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 151
(04)
Two identical ships A and B were sailing in the sea. When ship A was
sailing in deep sea and ship B was sailing in shallow sea, only one ship was
damaged by an earthquake erupted in a distant place of the sea bed.
1' What is the phenomenon resulted by the earthquake which caused the
ship damage?
2' Which ship, A or B got damaged ?
3' Explain the reason why the ship you mentioned above got damaged while
the other was not.
Technical Terms
Cyclones
Earthquakes
Tsunami
Wild fire
Depression
Storm surge
Crust
Mantle
Core
Tectonic plates
Convergent border
Divergent border
Slip border
Seismometer
Seismograph
Asteroid
Wave length
Amplitude
Focus
Epicentre
Seismic Waves
- iq<s iq<x
- N+ñlïmd
- iqkdñ
- ,eõ.sks
- mSvk wjmd;h
- jdiq<s W;ai¾ckh
- lfnd,
- m%djrKh
- yrh
- N+;eá
- wNsirK ;eá udhsu
- wmirK ;eá udhsu
- ;S¾hla ;eá udhsu
- N+lïmk udkh
- N+lïmk f¾Lh
- .%ylh
- ;rx. wdhduh
- úia;drh
- kdNsh
- wmsflakaøh
- N+lïmk ;rx.
- `ÓõÁÎ
- ¦Â¯vºÄ
-
_Úõª
-
Põmkz w
- A•UP CÓUP®
-
_ÇÀ PõØÖ
- ¦Â÷¯õk
- ö©ß‰i
- APo
- ¦Âzumk
- J¸[S® GÀø»
- Â›²® GÀø»
- ÁÊUS® GÀø»
- ¦Â¯vºÄ©õÛ
- ¦Â¯vºÄ Áøµ°
- G›PØPÒ
- Aø»}Í®
- Ãa\®
- SÂ¯®
- ÷©ßø©¯®
- ¦Â¯vºÄ Aø»PÒ
150
Science | Natural Disasters
Science | Natural Disasters 151
19
Sustainable Use of
Natural Resources
Name several things that you can see in your classroom. Find out and tabulate the
basic things that used to make them. Compare the table you made with the table
19.1.
Things in the
classroom
Wall
Table and chairs
Pens
Pencils
Books
Bags
Water bottles
Table 19.1
Basic things used to make them
Bricks, cement, lime
Timber, iron
Plastic, metal, ink
Wood, graphite
Paper
Cloth, metal, plastic
Glass, plastic
Find out about the natural substances that were based to make the things in the
classroom. Tabulate your findings and compare your table with Table 19.2 given
below.
Table 19.2
Substance
Natural substances based to
make them
Bricks
Lime
Cement
Timber (Wood)
Iron
Plastic
Paper
Cloths
Glass
Clay, water
Limestone
Limestone, clay, gypsum
Plants
Iron ore
Petroleum (mineral oils)
Plant fibre
Plant material, petroleum
Silica sand (minerals)
Study well, the things given in the second column of the table 19.2. Those are
known as natural resources.
152
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
153
Natural resources are the substances generated naturally, without the influence of
human activities.
There are some basic natural resources.
² Water
² Minerals and rocks
² Plants
² Timber
The conservation of water for the future generation while we are using water today
is known as sustainable utilization of water.
Now let us find out about these resources in detail.
19.1 Water
Man cannot live without air more than few
minutes. Further, he cannot survive without
water more than a week. Thus, the second
most important resource on the Earth is
water.
The base of life on the Earth is water. When
finding life on other planets, scientists find
whether there is water on them. The reason
for this is that the life we know is based on
water.
Figure 19.1 – Some uses of water
Assignment 19.1
Make a list of some other uses of water, that can be added to the above diagram
and present it creatively.
How water is used sustainably in the past
The natural way that the Earth’s surface gets water is the rain. If rain water is not
properly used, it flow through rivers and streams upto the sea. It was the slogan
of great king 'Parakramabhahu', that “Even a single drop of water should not be
allowed to flow into sea without being used by man or animals”.
A water tank can be introduced as a great creation of our ancient ancestors, used for
conservation and sustainable use of water.
152
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
153
Out spill
River
a ll
H e a d w
Wewa
Tank bund
Sluice
Ralapanawa
(Break water)
Canal
Bisokotuwa
Figure 19.2 (a) - 'Parakrama samudraya'
Figure 19.2 (b) - Important parts of a tank
A reservoir or a water body that is constructed by building a dam across a river or
a stream is known as a 'wewa'.
There are evidences to prove that Sri Lanka had a unique irrigation technology,
uncomparable to any other country in the world. Even now we have more than
12 000 large and small 'wewa' and embankments that irrigate the farmlands of our
country.
Assignment 19.2
Find the special terms used for the components related to 'wewa' and make a
report.
If there is no air pollution, the purest water that we can receive, is the rain water.
Now in Sri Lanka, as well as in some other countries, rain water is collected to be
used.
Figure 19.3 (a) - Collecting rain water
Figure 19.3 (b) – Using collected rain water
Rain water collection in domestic level is very important for the people in small
islands like maldive islands, where there are no natural reservoirs.
154
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
155
Activity 19.1
Create a model to collect rain water, draining from the roof into a tank. Use the
Figure 19.3(a) for this.
In dry zone, for the economical use of water
in agriculture, clay pots filled with water are
buried near the plants.
Try this method in your home garden also.
Scientist forecast that pure water will not be
available for the people in the world in near
future if recycling and reuse of water is not
put into practice.
Assignment 19.3
Figure 19.4 – Economical use of water in
agriculture
Construct a poster or make a booklet including the steps that can be followed to
use tap water in an economical way.
Now let us study about minerals and rocks which can be considered as another
natural resource.
19.2 Minerals and rocks
A mineral is an inorganic solid substance with a definite chemical composition
having a crystalline shape. Minerals occur naturally in our environment.
154
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
155
Figure 19.5(a) – A crystal of gem
Figure 19.5(b) – A giant crystal of quartz
Some useful minerals found in Sri Lanka are graphite, quartz, ilmenite, rutile,
zircon, feldspar, apatite and silica sand.
A rock is a collection of minerals
e.g. Gneiss, Granite
Some rocks are made of a single mineral.
e.g. Limestone, Quartz
The map in figure 19.6 shows the locations of largely found minerals resources of
Sri Lanka.
Kankasanthurai
Jaffna
Ampan
Chavakachcheri
Mannar
Murunkan
Point of
Kudiramale
Mullaitivu
Oddusuddan
Mankulam
Pulmude
Vavuniya
Kebithigollewa
Trincomalee
China Harbor
Rutile
Seruvila
Anuradhapura
Ralmadu
Eppawala
Thabbowa
Puttalam
Polonnaruwa
Dambulla
Elahara
Thalagoda
Adigama
Bangadeniya
Chilaw
Maravila
Kahatagaha Mine
Panirendawa
Kolongaha Mines
Kurunegala
Naththandiya
Dodamgas landa
Rattota
Matale
Kaikawala
Gem bearing areas
Graphite deposits
Main graphite mines
Sedimentary limestones
Crystal limestones
Limestones/ 'Hirigal'
Kaolin
Clay (to produce roofing tiles)
Clay (to produce cement)
Silica sand
Ilmenite
Monazite
Rutile
Iron ore deposits (magnetite)
Iron ore deposits (limonite)
Apatite
Copper
Batticaloa
Negombo
Vilagedara
Kandy
Pasyala
Bogala Mine
Deltota
Muthurajawela
Colombo
Gampaha
Kelaniya
Boralesgamuwa
Avissawella
Pussella
Pallekele
Thalathuoya
Mailapitiya
Mahiyanganaya
Karamatiya Bibile
Mathurata
Badulla
Ampara
Thirukkovil
Hatton
Alupola Monaragala
Eheliyagoda
Haldummulla
Pinnawala
Ratnapura
Dela
Kalawana
Balangoda
Kahawatta
Ekarella
Okkampitiya
Rakwana
Thanamalvila
Minihagalkanda
Kalutara
Beruwala
Ambalangoda
Dikgoda
meetiyagoda
Deniyaya
Hiniduma
Galle
Walpita
Matara
Pallerota
Hambantota
Figure 19.6 – The map which display the location of minerals in Sri Lanka
Source - The National Map Collection of Sri Lanka, School Edition, Survey Department
156
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
157
Assignment 19.4
Study the map carefully. Name 10 sources of minerals and rocks found in Sri
Lanka. Mention the places where each of those resources are found. State an
industry where each of those resources are used.
For extra knowledge
There are about 5 300 minerals identified in the world up to date. Number of
minerals registered in the International Union for Minerals is about 5 070.
Sri Lanka exports most of its mineral resources not as end products, but as raw
materials. Therefore, we get only the raw material value of those minerals, though
our country is rich in minerals.
Now let us study about gems which are very important among the minerals found
in Sri Lanka.
19.2.1 Gems
Gems are a sort of mineral crystals which are used in
making jewellery after cutting and polishing.
Gem industry in Sri Lanka has a history of more than
2 500 years. There are more than 200 kinds of gems
identified in the world. It is amazing to mention
that, more than 70 types out of them are found in
our small island.
Blue Sapphire is named as the national gem of Sri
Lanka.
Assignment 19.5
Make a list of the kinds of gems found in Sri Lanka.
Figure 19.7 - Blue Sapphire
Sri Lanka is the only country that export high quality large blue sapphire with
natural colour to the world market.
156
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
157
Gem mining
Gems are formed in the Earth, attached to large rocks. As the rocks in the mountains
get eroded, gems detach from them. Those gems then carried away with rain water
and are buried in plains of down hill. The deposit of gems and other pieces of rocks
is known as the vein of 'illama'.
First a proposed place for gems is selected and the mine, which is like a pit is dug.
When the vein or 'illama' is found, horizontal tunnels are excavated. Mixture of
substances collected from the vein is taken out of the mine and is sifted to separate
gems.
Figure 19.8(a) – A gem mine
Figure 19.8(b) – Sifting of gems using a sifting pan
Activity 19.2
Method :-
Demonstration of gem sifting method
Get a milk strainer woven of bamboo peels as a small substitute for a gem sifting
pan. Using it, sift a mixture of soil, sand and small pieces of pebbles, to separate
the pebble from the rest (even a separating pan made of clay can be used for this).
Characteristics of gems
Some important characteristics of gems are mentioned below.
² Hardness
² Resistance to be worn out
² Colour
² High refractive index
An unerasable streak can be drawn on a sheet of glass using a piece of quartz. The
reason for this is that the hardness of quartz is higher than that of glass. Mohr’s Scale
is prepared to compare the hardness of minerals. Hardness index 10 is assigned
for diamond, which is the hardest mineral. Hardness index 01 is assigned for talc,
which is the least hard mineral.
158
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
159
Table 19.3 - Mohr’s Hardness Scale
Hardness index
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
Substance
Talc
Gypsum
Calcite
Fluorite
Apatite
Feldspar
Quartz
Topaz
Corundum
Diamond
Study the Table 19.3 and answer the following questions.
1. Hardness index of finger nail is 2.2. Name two minerals that can streak a finger
nail.
2. Hardness index of a pile is 6.5. Name three minerals that cannot be streaked by
a pile.
Gems like blue sapphire, Ruby, Topaz and yellow sapphire found in Sri Lanka
belong to the Corundum family.
Gems do not ware out because of their hardness. Gems are used as bearings in
mechanical watches because of their resistance to be worn out.
Figure 19.9 – Gems used in a mechanical watch
Figure 19.10 – Gems of various colours
Gems found in Earth are of various colours. Gems acquire their characteristic colour
because of the trace impurities trapped in them, while they are forming in the Earth.
Colour is a main factor that increase where an impurity caused to increase the value
of a material. Hence, this is rare instance, where the value of a material increases
when mix impurities.
158
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
159
Refractive index of gems is used to identify them scientifically.
When a light ray enters from one transparent medium to another transparent
medium, its pathway changes at the interface. Refractive index is a measurement
of that change. Refractive indices of some transparent substances are given in the
table 19.4.
Table 19.4 – Refractive indices of some substances
Substance
Water
Glass
Topaz
Blue sapphire
Diamond
Refractive index
1.3
1.5
1.6
1.7
2.4
Because of high refractive index of gems, light rays are reflected repeatedly when
they are entered through the cut and polished gems. This gives a shine to the gem.
For extra knowledge
Gems with special characteristics
Alexandrite
Emit green colour in
natural light and red
colour in artificial light.
Cat's eye
When this gem is cut in
a special pattern, it looks
like a cat’s eye in light.
Star sapphire
When this gem is cut in a
special pattern, six lines
of light are visible in it.
Though gems are beautiful and attractive, various problems have raised because of
gem industry.
Problems associated with gem industry
² Soil erosion because of irregular mining.
² Mud deposition and water pollution in streams and water bodies, which are
used for gem sifting.
² Sudden depression of land and land slides occur due to over mining in some
areas.
² Extinction of fauna and forest cover depletion due to mining in forest areas.
160
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
161
² Reduction of crop production as most of gem mining is done in paddy fields.
² Collapsing of river banks due to mining near river banks.
² Spreading of some diseases like dengue, because of the breeding of mosquitoes
in abandoned gem pits.
² Decreasing of the population of certain trees like coconut, rubber and bamboo
because of their usage in gem mines to avoid collapsing of fits and tunnels.
² Existence of social discrimination between the owners and the workers of gem
mines, because of the difference of their income level.
² Absence of a permanent way of income for the labourers as gem mining industry
is not done uniformly through out the year.
² Deterioration of educational status of relevant area due to the attraction of
youngsters to gem industry.
National Gems and Jewellery Authority has taken certain measures to solve some
of the above problems associated with gem industry. When issuing permits for gem
mining, a cash deposit has to be made. If gem pits are abandoned without filling
government utilize the money deposited to fill the abandoned gem pits.
19.3 Trees
Voluntary contribution of school children
is taken for replanting those areas.
Plants as a natural resource from cradle to
grave, man extensively uses plants. Some
services rendered by plants to man and
environment are shown in figure 19.11.
Study figure 19.11 well and answer the
following questions.
1. Mention five material benefits
provided to man by plants which
are shown in the figure.
2. Mention five non-material benefits
shown here.
3. Write three benefits provided to man
by plants, which are not mentioned
in the figure.
Create
P
r
o
v
i
d
s
c
e
e
n
(
Provid
e f
u
Provide fo
o
d
A c t as wind b
P r o v i de habitats f
P r ovide raw m
for cloth
Provide v
phyto c
a
rio
a
t
ri
e
u
s
o
a
e
arrie
r
s
r
a
n
i
m
l
s
a
l
s
h
s
e
m
ic
als
e
l
P
r
o
v
i
d
i
n
g
s
h
e
l
t
e
r
s
H
i
c
b
e
a
u
t
y
M
e
d
i
i
c
n
e
s
)
n
i
a
r
al
n
o
o
e
o
2 int
elp to m aintain
er
R elease O
h
inter mons
p
s
e atmo
l e v el in
t h
Re d u c e C O 2
r
ai
S
u
p
p
l
y
o il
P
g o f s
r
e
ve
nti
o
n
e
r
o
s
i
o
n
t
i
m
b
e
r
R
e
d
u
c
e
f
l
y i n
r
n t d
Pre v e
Reduce land slides
o
o
d
i
n
g
Figure 19.11 - Some services rendered by plants
160
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
161
Some services given in figure 19.11 are provided by all plants.
e.g. Release oxygen to the atmosphere, removal of carbon dioxide from air
There are specific plants for certain activities or services. Information on such
plants are given in table 19.5.
Table 19.5
Supply food
Provide drinks
Supply fuel
For scenic beauty
For medicine
Chemicals
Raw materials for clothes
To manufacture paper
Supply spices
Beauty cultural substances
Assignment 19.6
‘Bulu’,
paddy, wheat, corn, pulses, yams, fruits, vegetables
tea, coffee, ‘Polpala’/‘Thengapookeerai’,
‘Ranawara’/‘Ponnawarasu’, wood apple
coconut, rubber, Gliricidia
Flowers and other horticultural plants
‘Aralu’/‘Kadukkai’,
‘Katuvelbatu’, ‘Venival’/‘Maramanjal’, margosa etc.
‘Kekuna’/‘Pakkili pal’, pinus, ‘Gammalu’/‘Thanakku’,
agarwood (Vallapatta)
cotton, jute, malberry
paddy, pinus
coriander, curry seed, turmeric, ‘Goraka’/‘Koraka puli’,
cumin seed
turmeric, 'Cocum', sandle wood, Aloe
‘Nelli’/'Nellikkai',
Display common names and scientific names of plants/trees grown in school
garden, in a suitable manner. Do not harm trees when labelling them.
19.3.1 Timber
The oldest building material is timber. Timber is the only building material that is
recyclable and renewable. Some special characteristics of timber are as follows.
y Durability
y Resistance to heat, electricity and sound
y Ability of creating attractive patterns due to the streak and the colour
Ancient times, Sri Lanka was famous for valuable timber. Timber like ebony,
satin wood and calamander wood which were in the dry zone of our country, were
extensively used by colonial rulers to manufacture furniture. Now such types of
timber are very rare in the country.
Therefore, the existing amount of timber should be used with maximum efficiency.
Selection of timber, according to the durability, which is needed for different uses
of timber, will lead to a sustainable utilization of timber that brings economical
advantage.
162
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
163
Diversity of timber in Sri Lanka is very high. We have more than 400 kinds of
plants in our country, that can be used for timber.
Assignment 19.7
Take leaves of plants in your area that can be used for timber. Insert the leaves
between two pages of paper to press. Make a booklet using pressed leaves
(make sure not to harm the plants when taking leaves).
For extra knowledge
State Timber Corporation has more than 250 samples of Sri Lankan timber.
Satin wood
'Nedun'/
'Samandalei'
'Colon'/
'Mansal kadampu'
'Kumbuk'/
'Marudha'
Mango
Activity 19.3
Study of various types of timber
Method :-
y Collect samples of various types of timber.
y Note down their colour.
y Test whether they have any odour.
y Find out the uses of those types of timber.
y Find out whether there is any specific use of any of those types of timber.
y Present your findings attractively.
Specific use of some types of timber
Each types of timber is used for specific purpose according to its properties. Some
examples are given below.
y
Jak timber is used for front doors of houses because of its strength, durability
and shine.
y Persian lilac ('Lunumidella') timber is used for ceilings because it is very
y
light.
'Panakka' timber is used for making umbrellas because the stem of panakka is
thin and strait.
y Ancient times pegs made of agar wood ('Vallapatta') timber are used to split
granite rocks.
'Hora' timber is used for underwater structures because it last long under water.
y
162
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
163
y
y
'Rukattana'/'Elilaippalai' timber is used to carve masks because of the
lightness and workability.
'Paaramara' timber is suitable to make the frame of “rabana” because of its
lightness and sonorousness.
y Alexandrian lawrel ('Domba') timber is resistant to vibrations, bending and
twisting. Therefore it is used for masts of yachts, neck-pole of bullocks carts
and yoke pole of ploughs.
For extra knowledge
Wooden bridge of Bogoda
This bridge is located at Hali-Ela in Badulla district. Even though it is about 400
years old, still it is in use.
Wooden bridge of Bogoda
Jak and 'Kumbuk' timber were used to construct this bridge. Wooden nails were
used to connect its beams. Ebony and 'Milla'/'Kattamanakku' timber were used
for its wood carvings.
Assignment 19.8
Prepare a collection of information about plants used for specific purpose. Get the
assistance of the elders of your area for this task.
Decaying of timber
Fungi can grow inside the timber. Timber is decayed because of the degradation of
complex carbohydrates which timber are made of due to the activity of enzymes
secreted by those fungi.
Fungi can retain inactively, even for many years inside timber. They grow when
favourable conditions are available. Such favourable conditions are the presence
of oxygen, moisture and nutrients. Out of those, the most important factor is the
moisture. Though other factors are available, fungi do not grow in the absence of
moisture.
Food is stored in some cells of tissues of timber. Timber can be destroyed by termites
and weevils who come in search of food.
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
164
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
165
Figure 19.12 (a) – Fungi that
grow on timber
Figure 19.12 (b) – Weevil that
bores timber (enlarged)
Figure 19.12 (c) – Termites that make
timber decay
Prevention from timber being decayed
Long lasting types of timber were abundant in ancient Sri Lanka. Therefore, timber
preservation methods are not necessary.
the
With
increase of human
population and human needs, such
types of timber have become very
rare, due to over usage.
For example timber like ebony,
'Nadun' and Teak are now classified
as luxurious types of timber.
Alburnum
Heartwood
Therefore, we are compelled to
use fast growing types of timber
like rubber, Persian lilac, mango,
alstonia, eucalyptus and pinus. But,
such types of timber do not last long in the environmental conditions of our country.
They are easily damaged by insects and fungi. Therefore, we have to use wood
preservative methods.
Figure 19.13 – Alburnum and heartwood of an
Ebony tree
Generally the heartwood of a tree lasts longer than its alburnum. Therefore,
heartwood of a tree should be used when making furniture to minimize them from
decaying.
Now let us find out how decaying of timber can be prevented.
Methods of preventing the timber decay
² Prevention of absorbing moisture into timber
² Seasoning of timber
² Usage of wood preservatives
Prevention of absorbing moisture into timber
Moisture absorption into timber can be prevented by applying enamel paint on
them.
e.g. Enamel paints are applied on school desks and chairs to prevent decay.
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
165
164
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Seasoning of timber
Timber can be seasoned by allowing it to dry slowly in controlled conditions.
Timber can be kept for long time by reducing the moisture content below 20%.
You can get a knowledge of this method by observing a timber stores or a carpenters
workshop.
Figure 19.14 – Seasoning of timber
Usage of wood preservatives
Timber can be preserved for a long time by soaking in suitable chemicals.
One such chemical is creosote, which is extracted from coal. This chemical is used
by State Timber Corporation when they are treating sleepers for railway lines and
wooden electrical posts.
Figure 19.15 (a) – Sleepers on railway line
Figure 19.15 (b) – Wooden electrical posts
Boron treatment is done for the longer life of rubber and pinus timber. Here the
timber is soaked in a mixture of boric acid, borax and a fungicide.
Forest conservation is promoted by proper usage and preservation of timber.
Increasing the lifetime of timber can be reduced tree felling.
Water, minerals and rocks, plants and timber are ours valuable resources. Therefore,
it is our responsibility to use them sustainably, while leaving their potential of
existence for the generations to come.
166
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
167
Summary
² Water, minerals and rocks, plants and timber are some examples for natural
resources.
² Construction of 'wewas' and using rain water collected in tanks are two
methods practiced by man for sustainable use of water.
² Minerals like gems are separated from other soil particles by sifting.
² Hardness, resistance to be worn out and high refractive index are some
identical properties of gems.
² Gem pits have adversely affected the environment and man.
² A large number of plants that can be used for various purposes are found
in Sri Lanka.
² Hundreds of timber plants are found in Sri Lanka and are used for various
purposes.
² Timber is destroyed by fungi and insects.
² There are several methods to prevent decaying timber.
² Natural resources should be used sustainably for the fulfilment of the future
generations.
Exercises
(01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1. What can be a mineral, out of those given below?
1. Coal
2. Mineral oil
3. Apatite
4. Gneiss
2. The uses of graphite are,
1. Manufacturing pencil rods 2. Manufacturing electrodes of electrical
cells
3. Using as a lubricant
4. All the above
3. Gems are valuable natural resource obtained from the Earth of our country,
which one below is not a cause for its high value?
1. Its beauty
3. Its rareness
2. Its hardness
4. Being a mineral
4. What is the national gem of Sri Lanka?
1. Blue sapphire
2. Yellow sapphire
3. Tourmaline
4. Cat's eye
166
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
167
5. Which one is the order, when graphite, gems and quartz are arranged in the
descending order of their hardness?
1. Gems, graphite, quartz
3. Quartz, gems, graphite
2. Gems, quartz, graphite
4. Quartz, graphite, gems
(02) Give short answers.
1. What are natural resources?
2. Why scientists pay attention to water, when they are in search of life on a
certain planet.
3. What is the purpose of building tanks ('wewas') in dry zone?
4. What is the type of water that exists in nature in its purest form?
5. Mention three characteristics of pure water?
6. Is granite a mineral or a rock? Give reasons for your answer.
7. What is the special property of gems, that leads to its separation method of
sifting?
8. Mention three adverse effects to the environment caused by the gem
industry?
9. What is the plant in Sri Lanka, that a maximum number of uses can be
obtained from? Mention five plant parts of it and their uses.
10. Mention one specific use that can be obtained from each of following types
of timber.
i. Agar wood ('Wallapatta')
iv. 'Rukattana'
ii. 'Paremara'
v. Persian lilac ('Lunumidella')
iii. Alexandrian laurel ('Domba')
11. Write one difference that you can observe between the heartwood and
alburnum of the stem of a plant.
12. Persian lilac ('Lunumidella') timber floats on water while ebony timber sink.
Thus arrange persian lilac timber, ebony timber and water according to the
ascending order of their densities.
Technical Terms
Natural resources
Sustainable use
Hardness
Refractive index
Recycling
Regenerative
Seasoning of timber
Wood preservatives
Wood preservation
- iajdNdúl iïm;a
- ;srir Ndú;h
- oeänj
- j¾;kdxlh
- m%;spl%SlrKh
- mqk¾ckkSh
- oej moï lsÍu
- oej wdrlaIl
- oej wdrlaIKh
- C¯ØøP ÁÍ®
- {ø»÷£s £¯ß£õk
- Áßø©
- •ÔÄa_mi
- «Ò_ÇØ]
- «Ð¸ÁõUP®
- ©µ®£uÛhÀ
- A›©µ |ØPõ¨¦ £uõºzu[PÒ
- ©µUPõ¨¦
168
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
Science | Sustainable use of Natural Resources
PB