SCIENCE
Part - I

Grade 9

Educational Publications Department

First Print  

2017

Second Print   2018

Third Print  

2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0162-3

Published by Educational Publications Department
Printed by PrintXcel Private Limited
164/4/A, Bakmeegahawewa Road, Pore,
Athurugiriya.

ii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka
Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya 
Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha
Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
Oba we apa vidya
Obamaya apa sathya
Oba we apa shakthi
Apa hada thula bhakthi
Oba apa aloke 
Apage anuprane
Oba apa jeevana we 
Apa mukthiya oba we
Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha
Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara
Eka mavakage daru kela bevina
Yamu yamu vee nopama
Prema vada sema bheda durerada
Namo, Namo Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iii

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjda
tl ksjfiys fjfikd
tl mdge;s tl reêrh fõ
wm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhda
tl f,i tys jefvkd
Ôj;a jk wm fuu ksjfia
fid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkS
fj<S iu.s oñkS
rka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;d
lsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

  p Ø  §PKÕ  w §  Úº  ©

E 
(cid:37)(cid:98)(cid:176)(cid:141)(cid:0)(cid:87)(cid:0) (cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:142)(cid:0)
(cid:87)(cid:98)(cid:176)(cid:141)(cid:0)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:0) (cid:138)(cid:0)(cid:38)(cid:70)(cid:196)
(cid:37)(cid:98)(cid:176)(cid:141)(cid:0)(cid:87)(cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:46)(cid:0) (cid:81)(cid:0)(cid:86)(cid:141)(cid:196)

(cid:0) (cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:30)(cid:138)(cid:0) (cid:196)

<p’  ª  WÚK p  µ  w §  Úº  ©
(cid:37)(cid:98)(cid:141)(cid:0) (cid:140)(cid:0)(cid:142)(cid:0)
(cid:87)(cid:98)(cid:141)(cid:0) (cid:140)(cid:0)(cid:30)(cid:95)(cid:0)(cid:30)(cid:138)(cid:0) (cid:192)(cid:176)(cid:0)
(cid:87)(cid:0) (cid:176)(cid:101)(cid:0)(cid:142)(cid:0) (cid:105)(cid:80)(cid:138)(cid:0)(cid:176)(cid:142)(cid:78)(cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:98)(cid:176)(cid:141)(cid:0)

(cid:0) (cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:142)(cid:119)(cid:0) (cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:87)(cid:0) (cid:196)

(cid:171)(cid:0) (cid:142)(cid:0) (cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:165)(cid:0)(cid:43)(cid:0) (cid:184)(cid:73)(cid:0) (cid:67)(cid:98)
E”—Û§ XŒPK º  «õqfpª
(cid:172)(cid:223)(cid:0) (cid:98)(cid:228)(cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:101)(cid:74)(cid:0) (cid:196)(cid:0)(cid:203)(cid:85)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:138)(cid:0)
(cid:171)(cid:0) (cid:98)(cid:136)(cid:0)(cid:101)(cid:0) (cid:171)(cid:0) (cid:60)(cid:0)(cid:172)(cid:55)(cid:138)(cid:142)(cid:101)(cid:98)(cid:176)(cid:141)(cid:0) (cid:9)

(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:28)(cid:83)(cid:176)(cid:142)(cid:0)

BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß
(cid:43)(cid:0) (cid:184)(cid:80)(cid:124)(cid:98)(cid:0)(cid:172)(cid:223)(cid:171)(cid:173)(cid:97)(cid:165)(cid:9)

iv

v

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more 

complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. 

The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, 

technological  differences,  research  and  new  indices.  Therefore,  it  is  required  to 

produce  the  textbook  by  including  subject  related  information  according  to  the 

objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing 
learning  experiences  that  suit  to  the  learner  needs.  The  textbook  is  not  merely 

a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher 

education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and 

to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you 

all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make 

the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this 

textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with 

a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer 

boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have 

strived to offer this textbook to you. 

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,
Commissioner General of Educational Publications,
Educational Publications Department,
Isurupaya,
Battaramulla.
2019.04.10    

vi

 
Monitoring and Supervision 

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka 

- Commissioner General of Educational Publications

Educational Publications Department

Direction

W. A. Nirmala Piyaseeli

Co-ordination

K. D. Bandula Kumara

- Commissioner of Educational Publications

(Development) 
Educational Publications Department

- Deputy Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

W. Suvendra Shyamaleen Jayawardhana

- Assistant Commissioner

Y. M. Priyangika Kumari Yapa

Educational Publications Department

- Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

G. M. A. Dinushi N. Muhandiram

- Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

Panel of Editors 

1.  Prof. Mangala Ganehiarachchi

2.  Prof. Nilwala Kottegoda

3.  Dr. M. K. Jayananda

4.  M. P. Vipulasena

5.  R. S. J. P. Uduporuwa

6.  Ashoka De Silva

7.  K. V. Nandani Sriyalatha

8.  P. Atchuthan

9.  V. Rajudevan

10.  K. D. Bandula Kumara

- Head, Department of Zoology

University of Kelaniya

- Senior Lecturer, Department of Chemistry

University of Sri Jayewardenepura

- Senior Lecturer

Department of Physical Science
University of Colombo

- Director (Science)

Ministry of Education

- Director (Science)

National Institute of Education

- Senior Lecturer

National Institute of Education

- Commissioner (retired)

Educational Publications Department

- Assistant Lecturer

National Institute of Education

- Assistant Lecturer

National Institute of Education

- Deputy Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

11.  W. Suvendra Shyamaleen                 

- Assistant Commissioner

Jayawardhana

Educational Publications Department

12.  Y. M. Priyangika Kumari Yapa

- Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

vii

Panel of Writers

1.  Dr. K. Ariyasinghe

2.  S. M. Saluwadana

3.  L. Gamini Jayasooriya

- Professional Science Writer
- Science Co-ordinator (retired)

-

Dept. of Provincial Education (North Central)
In-Service Advisor (Science)
Divisional Education Office, Wennappuwa

4.  W. G. A. Ravindra Veragoda

- Teacher Service

5.  Muditha Athukorala

Sri Rahula National School, Alawwa

- Teacher Service

Prajapathi Girl's School, Horana

6.  T. Indika Krishantha Nawarathne

- Teacher Service

7.  R. M. P. Bandara

8.  H. T. C. Gamini Jayarathne

9.  A. M. T. Pigera

10.  M. A. P. Munasinghe

Nalanda College, Colombo 10

- Teacher Service

Neluwa National School, Neluwa
In-Service Advisor (retired)

-
- Assistant Director of Education (retired)
- Chief Project Officer (retired)
National Insitute of Education

11.  Suyama Kottegoda

- Teacher Service

12.  K. Shanthakumar

-

Bandaragama Central College, Bandaragama
In-Service Advisor (Science)
Zonal Education Office, Haliela

13.  J. Emanuvel

- Principal 

14.  M. M. F. Rafaka

St. Anthony's Boys' School, Colombo 13

- Deputy Principal

Muslim Ladies College, Colombo 04

15.  M. M. S. Zareena

- Teacher Service

16.  T. Balakumaran

Budurdeen Mahmood  Ladies College, Kandy
Teacher Service (retired)

Language Editing and  Proof Reading
1.  M. R. S. K. Ganegoda

2.  Anupa Madupani Weerarathne

- Teacher Service (retired)

- Assistant Director

Ministry of Education

Cover Page, Illustrations and Page 
Layout
Malaka Lalanajeewa

- Graphic Designer

Technical Assistance
1.  Abisheka Ranasinghege
2.  M. D. Tharindu Samarasinghe

- Educational Publications Department
- Educational Publications Department

viii

Introduction

This  textbook  was  compiled  by  the  Educational  Publications  Department  in  accordance 
with the syllabus prepared by the National Institute of Education for the use of Grade 9 
students in the Sri Lankan school system with effect from 2018.

An  effort  has  made  here  to  arrange  the  subject  content  to  suit  the  national  educational 
goals, common national competencies, the objectives of teaching science and the content 
of the syllabus.

The subject of science directs the student towards a more active learning process in a manner 
as to develop knowledge, skills and attitudes needed for a developmental scientific thought.

In the compilation of this textbook, subject content is largely arranged based on experiences 
of daily life. It has contributed to prove the fact that the subject of science is very much 
closer to the day to day life.

The compilation of this textbook based on activities is a distinctive feature. The activities are 
prepared based on the scientific method in order to develop knowledge, skills and attitudes. 
Activities that can be performed individually at home as well as in school are incorporated 
here. We believe that learning through activities would contribute to create a liking and an 
interest in the child towards learning science. 

At the end of each chapter, a summary, a series of exercises and a glossary were included. It 
enables the student to identify the important details of the chapter as well as to self evaluate 
the achievement of learning outcomes.

For the purpose of directing the student to study further about the subject matter, more 
information is included in the "For extra knowledge". It is given only to broaden the subject 
area of the child and certainly not to ask questions at term tests.

Assignments  and  projects  are  given  with  the  purpose  of  directing  the  student  towards 
an  explorative  study.  It  enables  the  students  to  develop  the  higher  order  skills  such  as 
application, analysis and synthesis of the concepts achieved from the lesson.

We strongly believe that the duty of the teachers who teach science is to direct the student 
for self learning instead of teaching the student using traditional teaching methods. This 
textbook can be utilized by the teachers as a learning tool to execute their teaching role 
properly. 

We would like to bestow our sincere thanks on Chief project officer D. M. Wijesinghe and 
science teacher (Visakha Vidyalaya) S. M. Sanjeewa.

We kindly request you to forward your comments and suggestions on this textbook to the 
Educational Publications Department. 

Board of Writers and Editors

ix

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x

Contents

1. Applications of Micro-organisms

1.1
1.2
1.3

Micro-organisms
Environments and substrates of micro-organisms
Effects of micro-organisms

2. Eye and Ear

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

Structure and function of the human eye
Defects of vision
Eye diseases
Structure and function of the human ear
Defects of ear

3. Nature and Properties of Matter

3.1
3.2
3.3

Elements
Compounds
Mixtures

4. Basic Concepts Associated with Force

4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4

Force
Magnitude of force
Direction of force and point of application
Graphical representation of force

5. Pressure Exerted by Solid

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4

Pressure
Factors affecting the pressure
Units of pressure
Changing the factors affecting pressure as needed

Page
01
01
03
04

16
16
22
29
31
33

38
39
44
46

52
52
53
54
56

60
60
61
66
67

xi

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. The Human Circulatory System

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4

Structure of the human heart
Arteries, veins and capillaries
Components of blood and their functions
Blood transfusion

7. Plant Growth Substances

7.1
7.2

Introduction to plant growth substances
Uses of artificial growth substances

8. Support and Movements of Organisms

8.1
8.2
8.3

Support and movements of animals 
Bones, muscles and joints
Support and movements of plants

9. The Evolutionary Process 

9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4

Origin of the Earth
Origin of life on the Earth
Evolution
Importance of evolution in bio-diversity

72
72
73
75
76

83
83
86

89
89
90
92

98
98
99
102
107

Cover Page :- Human heart and a magnified DNA helix.

xii

1

Applications of
Micro-organisms

1.1   Micro-organisms

Recall  what  you  have  learnt  about  micro-organisms  in  grade  8. You  have  learnt 
micro-organisms are unicellular or multicellular organisms which cannot be seen 
clearly with the naked eye. Do assignment 1.1 using the previous knowledge.

Assignment 1.1

 ² Prepare a list of the groups of micro-organisms you know and write names of 

micro-organisms belong to each group.  

Micro-organisms live in our environment as well as in our body.

Most micro-organisms are favourable to humans and other living beings, but some 
are harmful.

Micro-organisms  are  a  wide  spread  and  common  species  category  of  living 
organisms on Earth. They are a group of living organisms with a simple structure. 
They grow fast and have high rate of reproduction.

Micro-organisms have the ability to adapt for different environmental conditions 
and modes of nutrition.

Unicellular  and  some  of 
micro-organism category.

the  multicellular  organisms  can  be  seen 

in 

These micro-organisms can be categorized into groups as bacteria, fungi, algae and 
protozoa. Viruses which are a group in between the living and non-living are also 
studied under micro-organisms.

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

1

Algae

Chlamydomonas

Spirogyra

Diatoms

Viruses 

 ² Chlamydomonas
 ² Spirogyra
 ² Diatoms

 ² Unicellular or multicellular
 ² Filamentous or thallus body 

forms

 ² Microscopic alga floating 
on the water surfaces are 
called phytoplanktons

 ² Possess chlorophyll 

and have the ability of 
photosynthesis

 ² Algal varieties such as Ulva 
are visible to the naked eye

 ² Influenza virus
 ² HIV
 ² Ebola virus
 ² Dengue virus 

 ² Electron microscopic
 ² Display both living and 

non-living characteristics 
 ² Multiply only inside the 

living cells

 ² No cellular organization
 ² They do not show the living 

characteristics such as 
respiration and growth 

 * Several enlarged diagrams of microbes are given in the above table. Memorization of the 

scientific names is not needed.

1.2     Environments and substrates of micro-organisms

Micro-organisms live within all the eco systems on the Earth where other living 
organisms survive. Microbial world spreads among soil, water and for about up to 
6 km of the atmosphere. These organisms survive even on and within the body of 
plants and animals. Meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, human skin, mouth, alimentary 
canal and urinary tract are some specific substrates that micro-organisms grow.

Microbes  can  survive  even  under  extreme  environmental  conditions.  Hot  water 
springs, salt marshes, liquids such as petrol and  diesel are some such environments.

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

3

 
1.3    Effects of micro-organisms
Micro-organisms have been used in different industries by human from the past. 
Micro-organisms are beneficial for the environmental equilibrium. But, they can 
also be harmful to human because some of them act as pathogens and spoil food.  

1.3.1    Beneficial effects of micro-organisms

Micro-organisms  are used  in  agriculture, medicine, conservation of  environment 
and  in  different  kinds  of  industries  in  seek  of  economical  advantages  and  for 
research purposes. Here we will investigate how they are being used in different 
fields.  

Applications of micro-organisms in agriculture

 ² Gene technology                 

In agriculture, crop harvest is enhanced and 
enriched  by  producing  drought-resistant 
and  pest-resistant  crops  and  crops  with 
high  nutrients  and  taste,  with  the  aid  of 
micro-organisms.  Further,  biological 
pesticides  and  weedicides  are  developed 
using micro-organisms. 

Golden Rice

Normal Rice

Figure 1.1

Genes  of  the  bacterium  Erwinia  uredovora  is  used  in  developing  golden  rice 
enriched with vitamin A (figure 1.1).

Genes  of  the  bacterium  Bacillus  thuringiensis  is  muted  in  Zea  maize  genome  to 
produce toxins to crop pests.

 ² Nitrogen fixation

Even though 78% of Nitrogen exists naturally in the
atmosphere, plants have a limited ability to absorb it 
directly. But Rhizobium, a type of bacteria that lives 
in the nodules of legumes such as beans and  peas 
has  the  ability  to  absorb  atmospheric  Nitrogen 
directly. This process is known as Nitrogen fixation. 
Commercially  produced  Rhizobium  is  used  in 
cultivation  lands  in  order  to  increase  the  yield  of 
legumes.

Figure 1.2 - Nodules of legumes

Azotobacter, a free living Nitrogen fixing bacteria, is directly added to the cultivation 
lands.  They are known as bio fertilizers. Bio fertilizers are the substances which 
make the soil rich with nutrients by using micro-organisms.

4

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

              
 ² Producing compost                 

Compost is prepared by rapid decomposition of 
organic  matter  by  micro-organisms.  Compost 
adds  mineral  to  the  soil  systematically  and 
makes  favourable  conditions  for  plants  to 
grow. The organic matter in compost are often 
decomposed by bacteria and fungi.  

 ² Bio-pesticides
Some  of  the  micro-organisms  can  be  used  as 
bio pesticides to control insect pests that cause damage to the crops.

Figure 1.3 - Producing compost by using 
organic matter

e.g.  The fungus Alternaria is used to combat the aquatic weed, salvinia.

Applications of micro-organisms in medicine 

Use  of  micro-organisms  to  treat  the  diseases  caused  by  another  micro-organism 
is  very  common  in  medicine.  Micro-organisms  are  used  to  produce  antibiotics, 
vaccines and anti-toxins.  

 ² Producing antibiotics
Chemicals  produced  in  the  body  of  a
microbe  to  destroy  or  sabotage  another 
micro-organism are known as antibiotics.

Fungi  and  bacteria  are  used  to  produce 
antibiotics. Antibiotics can kill bacteria and 
fungi  but they do not fight against infections 
caused by viruses. 

Figure 1.4 - Some antibiotics

Although, antibiotics are not much harmful to human they can cause side effects if 
used without medical advice. 

Penicillin, Amoxicillin, Tetracycline and Erythromycin are used against bacterial 
infections while Griseofulvin is used against fungal infections.

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

5

 
 
For extra knowledge

 ² The antibiotic Penicillin was discovered by the Scottish 

scientist Alexander Fleming. 

 ² It is produced using the fungus Penicillium notatum. 

 ² Producing vaccines
A  vaccine  typically  contains  an  agent  that  resembles  a  disease  causing 
micro-organism; and is often made from weakened or killed forms of the microbe 
or from its toxins.

Alexander Fleming

 ² Vaccines made from weakened microbes
e.g. Polio, Tuberculosis, Measles

 ² Vaccines made from killed microbes
e.g. Cholera, Influenza, Typhoid

 ² Vaccines made from toxins of microbes

e.g. Tetanus, Diphtheria

 ² Vaccines made from body parts of microbes using genetic engineering 

e.g. Hepatitis B

Assignment 1.2

Collect information about the immunization programmes conducted in Sri Lanka. 

Display the collected information in a wallpaper in the classroom. 

 ² Producing anti toxins

Bio-chemical substances produced by pathogenic bacteria which harm the host’s 
activity  are  known  as  toxins. Anti-toxins  are  synthesized  using  these  toxins  by 
removing its toxic components.
  e.g. Tetanus vaccine

Applications of micro-organisms in industries

Various  strains  of  microbes  are  used  for  research  and  economic  benefits.  Using 
micro-organisms  in  industrial  activities  for  economic  benefits  is  known  as 
Industrial Microbiology.

6

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

Micro-organisms  are  commonly  used  in  following  large  scale  and  small  scale 
industries.

 ² Producing dairy products (yoghurt, curd, cheese, butter)
 ² Producing biogas
 ² Metal extraction
 ² Products based on plant fibres
 ² Producing alcohol
 ² Producing vinegar
 ² Bakery industry

For extra knowledge

Industry 

Micro-organisms used

Producing alcohol
Producing vinegar
Bakery industry
Producing dairy products 
(yoghurt, curd, cheese, butter)
Producing biogas
Products based of plant fibres

Metal extraction

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Acetobacter aceti
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
Lactobacillus bulgaricus
Streptococcus thermophilus
Methanococcus, Methanobacterium
Bacillus corchorus, Bacillus comesii 
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans
Thiobacillus ferrooxidans

 ² Producing biogas
A  mixture  containing  organic  materials  such 
as  straw,  cow  dung  and  water  is  used  to 
produce  biogas.  Anaerobic  bacteria  such  as 
Methanococcus react on these organic surfaces 
and produce biogas. Biogas mainly consists of 
Methane gas. Therefore, it can be used as an 
energy source.

 ² Metal extraction
The most simple and effective technology used for the metal extraction from low 
grade ores, by the use of microbes, is known as bio-leaching. Uranium and Copper 
are such two metals that are extracted by bio-leaching.

Figure 1.5 - Producing biogas

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

7

 ² Milk based products 
Let us do activity 1.1 to demonstrate the production of yoghurt. 

Activity 1.1

You will need :-   Pure cows’ milk, yoghurt sample for culture, sugar, gelatin, a pan  

      to boil milk, some plastic cups, a thermometer

Method :-
 ² Heat cows’ milk for 15-30 minutes in a temperature between 88 0 C - 95 0 C.
 ² Remove the cream.
 ² Add sugar and gelatin as required.
 ² Add culture youghurt sample to the milk in small amount in 60 0C temperature 

and mix well.

 ² Put the mixture into plastic cups. 
 ² Keep the mixture for 6 - 7 hours in the temperature between 40 0 C - 45 0 C.
 ² Cover the cups and keep in the refrigerator (under 4 0 C).

Step - I

Step - II

Step - III

88 - 95 0C

Milk

Cream

Milk

Gelatin

Sugar

Cooling

Step - VII

Step - V &VI

40 - 45 0C

Heat for 15-30 min

Step - IV

60 0C

Extract

Milk

Incubating for 6-7 hours

Refrigeration under 4 0C

Figure 1.6 

8

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

When boiling, unfavourable bacteria in milk get 
destroyed.  Lactobacillus  and  Streptococcus  are 
used as culture in producing yoghurt. They turn  
Lactose into Lactic acid. Since it creates an acidic 
medium,  growth  of  other  micro-organisms  get 
retarded and enhance preservation. Refrigerating 
further retards bacterial growth.

 ² Products based on plant fibres

Plant fibres are used for various products and 
these  fibres  are  separated  by  using  bacteria. 
Coconut, hemp, palmyrah and agave plants are 
used to get fibre. The compound pectate which 
is among the fibres keep them bound together. 
The  Pectinase  enzyme  which  is  produced  by 
the  relevant  bacteria  helps  to  separate  these 
fibres by digesting pectate.

Figure 1.7 - Dairy products
(yoghurt, curd, cheese, butter)

Figure 1.8 - Crushing coconut husks

Applications of micro-organisms in environmental conservation

Micro-organisms  are  commonly  used  for  environmental  conservation.  The 
technology  used  to  remove  environmental  pollutants  using  micro-organisms  is 
known as bio-remediation.

Following are some instances where bio-remediation is applied.

 ² Microbes are used to decompose the organic waste matter in polluted water.
 ² Pseudomonas; a kind of a bacteria which is released on to the ocean water for 
the  decomposition  of  oil  layers  on  the  ocean. An  enzyme  released  by  these 
micro-organisms decomposes the hydrocarbons in oil.

 ² Heavy metals such as Chromium (Cr), Lead (Pb) and Mercury (Hg) are released 
to the environment from different industries. This polluted water is sent through 
a tower which contains bacteria to remove these toxic heavy metals from water.

 ²

In producing bio-degradable plastics (plastics that are decomposed by bacteria)

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

9

We  have  discussed  the  favourable  impacts  of  micro-organisms.  Based  on  the 
following features, micro-organisms are used in economically important large-scale 
productions.

 ² Their biological processes occur very rapidly as their growth rate and metabolic 

rate is high.

 ² Various  strains/varieties  of  microbes  exist  that  are  capable  of  acting  and 

multiplying on various substances.

 ² Since  micro-organisms  possess  simple  genes,  they  can  be  easily  used  for 
genetic  engineering.  Hence,  microbes  are  often  used  for  modern  genetic 
engineering.

 ² The majority of micro-organisms can be obtained at very low rates or free of 

charge from the environment to use in industries.

 ² Though,  large  amount  of  energy  is  required  for  other  industries,  a  small 

amount of energy is required for industries using microbes.

 ² Though,  most  of  the  industries  cause  heavy  environmental  pollution  and 
serious  environmental  deterioration,  the  industries  with  microbes  cause 
minimal environmental damages.

Assignment 1.3

Gather information regarding the applications of micro-organisms in environmental 
conservation. Prepare an article to present in the wallpaper. 

1.3.2    Adverse effects of micro-organisms

Causing  diseases  for  man,  plants  and  animals  that  are  economically  important 
for man, food spoilage and economical damage to non-living surfaces are several 
adverse effects of microbes. Biological weapons are another instance where man 
uses microbes adversely.
Causing diseases

Bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa are the groups of micro-organisms that cause 
diseases. A  micro-organism  that  has  the  potential  to  cause  a  disease  is  called  a 
pathogen. Mosquitoes and flies are vectors which carry the pathogen to the host. 
Host is an organism, who provides its body inside or outside as the substrate to 
growth of the pathogen. 

e.g.   Viruses act as the pathogen for Dengue disease, while mosquitoes are the    

vectors. Symptoms appear on man, who is the host. 

10

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

 
 
 ² Diseases caused by micro-organisms to human
Microbial  infections  spread  by  air,  water,  food,  contact,  vectors  etc.  Pathogenic 
micro-organisms  cause  different  infections  to  human  beings  through  various 
methods. Information of such infections is given in table 1.2.

Table 1.2 - Information of diseases caused by micro-organisms to human

Pathogen

Disease

Method of spread

Cold

Air

Viruses

Dengue

Mosquito vectors

Way the pathogen enters 
the body

Through respiratory 
system
Through the skin by 
mosquito bites

AIDS

Blood and other fluids of 
an infected person

Through sexual contacts 
or blood transfusion

Tuberculosis

Air

Through respiratory 
system

Typhoid fever

Polluted food and 
vectors such as housefly

Through digestive system 
with food

Bacteria

Malaria

Mosquito (vectors)

Protozoa

Amoebic
dysentery

Polluted water and food

Leishmaniasis Vectors such as sandfly

Through the skin by 
mosquito bite
Through digestive 
system
Through open wounds on 
the skin

Pityriasis 

Fungi

Rashes

Contact of an infected 
person or through clothes 
of an infected person

Through skin

 * The bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis is used as a biological control to destroy the larval 
stages of dengue mosquitoes.

For extra knowledge

Leishmaniasis is a disease caused by a protozoan. It is 
spread by the bite of Sandfly which acts as the vector. 
The protozoan can enter through skin ulcers. Then, it 
infects  the  skin,  mouth  and  nasal  path.  Skin  ulcers, 
fever, reducing red blood cells and enlarging liver are 
symptoms of leishmaniasis.  

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

11

 ² Diseases caused by micro-organisms to plants
Some of the diseases caused by micro-organisms to plants are given below. 

Powdery mildew disease

Powdery mildew is a disease caused by a fungus. The leaves, stem, flowers and 
fruits of the plant are affected by this disease. Appearing of white or gray colour 
powdery material is the main symptom of infected parts. This disease can damage 
every part of the tree (figure 1.9).

Late blight 

Potato  plant  is  commonly  affected  by  this  disease  which  is  caused  by  a  fungus. 
Brown  spots  can  be  seen  on  the  leaves  and  later  they  turn  into  black. Then,  the 
whole tree gets affected by the disease (figure 1.10).

Wilting

Fungi  or  bacteria  cause  this  disease.  The  xylem  of  the  plants  which  transports 
water throughout the tree gets affected from this disease. Later the xylem does not 
function properly due to damage. Therefore, the whole plant gets withered due to 
poor supply of water (figure 1.11).

Figure 1.9 - Grapes with powdery 
mildew disease

Figure 1.10 - Potato plant with 
wx.udr frda.hg 
late blight
f.dÿre jQ w¾;dm,a 
Ydlhla

Figure 1.11 - Tomato plant 
m;% úÑ;% frda.hg f.dÿre 
with bacterial wilt
jQ mefmd,a Ydlhla

fld< fldv ùu frda.hg 
f.dÿre jQ ñßia Ydlhla

Food spoilage caused by micro-organisms 

1'11 rEmh 

Micro-organisms multiply on food as food has the necessary factors for the growth 
of  micro-organisms.  Micro-organisms  convert  the  components  of  the  food  into 
unfavourable materials or they add toxic materials to food. Due to this reason the 
nature of the food is changed. The change of physical and chemical nature of food 
makes the food unfit for consumption. This process is known as food spoilage. 

(You  have  learnt  about  food  spoilage  such  as  fermentation  of  carbohydrates, 
putrefaction of proteins and rancidity of lipids in grade 8).

12

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

Summary

 ² Micro-organisms are unicellular or multicellular organisms which cannot be 

seen clearly with the naked eye.

 ² The main micro-organism categories are bacteria, fungi, algae and protozoa.
 ² Viruses have living and non-living characteristics but, they  are also studied 

in microbiology.
 ² Micro-organisms 

favourable  
environmental conditions and even under the extreme environmental conditions.
 ² Micro-organisms  are  used  in  various  fields  such  as  agriculture,  medicine, 

the  eco-systems  with 

live  within  all 

industries and for environmental conservation as well.

 ² Food spoilage, diseases, damage done to the economically important surfaces 
and use of micro-organisms as biological weapons are some adverse effects 
of micro-organisms.

Exercise
01) Select the correct or most suitable answer. 

1.  A group of autotrophic micro-organisms is,
2. fungi 

1. viruses 

3. algae 

4. protozoa

2. Toxic chemicals produced in the body of a microbe to destroy or sabotage    
    an another micro-organism is called as,
      1. antibodies 

3. antiseptics  4. antibiotics  

2. anti nutrients 

3. Some characteristics of viruses are given below.

a. No cellular organization
b. Multiply only in living cells
c. Do not show the living characteristics  such as respiration and growth

         The correct statements of the above are; 

      1. a and b 

2. a and c 

3. b and c 

4. a, b and c

4.  A disease caused by bacteria is, 
 2. Tuberculosis 
      1. Malaria 

3. Rabies 

4. Ebola

5. The technology used to remove the environmental pollutants by applying   
     micro-organisms is known as, 

1. bio-control   
3. bio-remediation 

2. bio-degradation     
4. bio-leaching 

02) State whether the following statements are true (√) or false (x).

1. Antibiotics are any chemical substance that is used to destroy or 

deactivate micro-organisms. 

2. The vaccine given for tetanus contains weakened bacterial toxins.

(   )
(   )

14

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

 
 
       
 
3. Viruses  are  pathogens  that  display  both  living  and  non-living 

characteristics.
Most  microbes  in  the  environment  are  unfavourable  to  living 
beings. 

4.

5. Rhizobium bacteria found in the root nodules of legume plants fix 

atmospheric nitrogen. 

(   )

(   )

(   )

03) Answer the following questions.

1.  Name three industries based on microbial activity.

2.  Explain two instances where micro-oraganisms are used in the medical field.

3.  Mention three instances where microbes are used in environmental conservation.

4.  Write  three  good  health  habits  that  could  minimize  infections  caused  by 

micro-organisms. 

5.  State  three  strategies  used  in  agriculture  to  minimize  infections  caused  by 

micro-organisms.

Technical Terms
Micro-organism
Microbiology
Substrate
Industrial microbiology
Nitrogen fixation
Organic food
Bio pesticides
Antibiotics
Biogas
Bio-leaching
Bio-remediation
Food spoilage
Biological weapons
Immunization
Genes
Antitoxins
Bio-degradation
Pathogen
Vector
Host

- ~sn[Q
- ~sq°›¯À
- RÌ¨£øh

- laIqø Ôúhd
- laIqø Ôj úoHdj
- Wmia;rh
- ld¾ñl laIqø Ôj úoHdj - øPzöuõÈß•øÓ ~sq°›¯À
- khsg%cka ;sr lsÍu
- ldnksl wdydr
- ffcj m<sfndaOkdYl
- m%;sÔjl 
- Ôj jdhqj
- ffcj laISrKh
- ffcj m%;sl¾uKh
- wdydr krla ùu
- ffcj ridhksl wú
- m%;sYla;slrKh
- cdk
- m%;sOQ,l
- ffcj ydhkh
- jHdêcklhd
- jdylhd
- Odrlhd

- ø|uμ\ß £vzuÀ
- ÷\uÚ EnÄ
- E°›¯Ø ¥øh |õ]ÛPÒ
- ~sq°ºU öPõÀ¼PÒ
- E°º Áõ²
- E°›¯À }º•øÓ¯›¨¦
- E°›¯À £›P›¨¦
- EnÄ £ÊuøhuÀ
- E°›¯À B²u[PÒ
- }º¨¥hÚ©õUPÀ
- £μ®£øμ¯»SPÒ
- öuõm]öÚv›
- E°›¯À Ÿv¯õP ¤›¢uÈøP¯øhUTi¯
- ÷|õ¯õUQ
- ÷|õ´U PõÂ
- Â¸¢x ÁÇ[Q

Science | Applications of Micro-organisms

15

The table 2.1 shows the information about the main parts of the eye. 

Table 2.1 - Information about the major parts of the human eye

Structural Part 
Sclerotic  layer

Information

 • Tough, white outer most layer of the eye
 • Light do not penetrate through it.

Cornea

 • The  sclerotic  layer  in  front  of  the  iris  becomes  thin,  

Choroid

Retina

transparent and forms the cornea

 • Inside the sclerotic layer is the choroid
 • Supplies blood to the eye

 • Inside the Choroid layer is the retina
 • The light sensitive rod cells and cone cells are located in 

this layer.

Aqueous humour

 • A transparent watery liquid.
 • Fills the space between the lens and cornea.

Lens

 • Transparent biconvex lens that has the ability to change its 

curvature

 • Focuses the images on retina.

Iris
Pupil

Ciliary muscle

Vitreous humour

 • Controls the amount of light entering the eye
 • The hole in the centre of the iris.
 • It allows light to enter and pass through the lens.
 • Supports to hold the lens
 • Helps to change the curvature of the lens, when necessary.
 • A  transparent  Jelly-like  substance,  which  fills  the  rear    

cavity of the lens. 

Fovea/Yellow spot

 • Helps to maintain the spherical shape of the eye.
 • The  sensitive  part  of  the  retina,  where  the  sharp  images 

formed.

Blind spot

 • The  area  of  the  retina,  where  light  sensitive  cells  are  not 

Optic nerve

located.

 • Though, light is focused no vision is possible.
 • The nerve that connects the eye and the brain.
 • Convey the visual stimulus from the retina to the brain for 

the interpretation of the image.

18

Science | Eye and Ear 

 
Let us see how the eye perceives visionary senses.

Let us inquire the way that our eye functions to give us sight. To see an object clearly, 
light rays must be entered to the eye from the object. The rays refract through the 
lens  and  converge  on  to  the  retina,  forming  an  inverted  image.  Then,  the  nerve 
endings on the retina get stimulated and send the message about the image to the 
brain through optic nerve. Optical area of brain interpret it as an upright image.  

Eye lens is convex. Let us engage in the activity 2.2 to study the refraction of light 
through convex and concave lenses.

Activity 2.2

You will need :-   A convex lens, a concave lens, a parallel beam of light made 
by using a torch or by reflecting the sunlight using a mirror, a 
comb 

Method :-
 ² Let the parallel beam of light fall on the convex lens and observe the refracted 

rays.

 ² Let the parallel beam of light fall on the concave lens and observe the refracted 

rays.

 ² Draw the path of the light in both situations in your note book.

The path of a parallel beam of light directed towards a convex lens after refracting 
through  the  lens  is  depicted  in  the  figure  2.5. After  refraction  the  light  rays  get 
converged to a point. 

Focus

Figure 2.5 - Refraction of parallel beam of light through convex lens

Focal length

The point that collects light rays in front of a convex lens is called the focal point 
of the lens. The distance between lens and focus is focal length.

Science | Eye and Ear  19

A parallel beam of light falls on a concave lens after refraction through the lens get 
diverged as in the figure 2.6.

Focal length

Focus

Figure 2.6 - Refraction of parallel beam of light through concave lens

After  the  refraction,  the  light  rays  can  be  observed  to  be  diverged,  as  shown  in 
figure 2.6. Here the rays after refraction appear to come from a point called focus.

An image of an close object forms far from the convex lens, while far object forms 
an image, close to the lens. Let us engage in activity 2.3 to study this concept.

Activity 2.3

You will need :-   A convex lens, a candle, a box of matches, lens holder, a screen 
(you can prepare a  screen by covering a lens holder or a small 
box with a white paper)

Method :-

 ² Fix the convex lens to the lens holder. Using the lens get a clear image of a 

distant object on the screen.

 ² Light the candle in front of the lens and get a clear image on the screen. 
 ² Measure the distance between the lens and the image ( image distance) in both 

cases, and compare.

You can confirm that the image distance is more when the object is located close by 
than it is located far away.

But, considering the eye, the distance from the lens to the retina (image distance) 
cannot  be  changed.  Then,  how  can  we  clearly  see  the  objects  close  by  and  far 
away? The lens of the eye has the ability to increase or decrease its curvature to the 
required size. 

Let us do the activity 2.4 to study about the image formation of a distant object and 
nearby object without changing the image distance.

20

Science | Eye and Ear 

Activity 2.4 

 You will need :-   A convex lens with a less curvature, another convex lens with 

a higher curvature, candle, lens holder, screen

Method-
 ² Fix the convex lens with less 
curvature  to  the  lens  holder 
and  get  a  clear  image  of  a 
distant object on to the screen 
(figure 2.7 a).

 ² Fix  the  convex  lens  with  a 
higher  curvature  to  the  lens 
holder  without  changing  the 
distance between the lens and 
the  screen.  Now  get  a  clear 
image  of  the  lit  candle  on  to 
the screen (figure 2.7 b).

Figure 2.7 a

Figure 2.7 b

The focal length is comparatively 
high in low-convex lenses (lens 
with a less curvature) while the 
focal  length  is  relatively  low 
in  higher  convex  lenses  (lenses 
with a higher curvature).  

Figure 2.8 a - Convex 
lens with less curvature

Figure 2.8 b - Convex lens 
with high curvature

Figure 2.8

According to the activity 2.4 it can be concluded as follows. 
To get a clear image without changing the image distance,

 ² The curvature of the eye lens should be reduced for a distant object. 
 ² The curvature of the eye lens should be increased for a close object. 

Assignment 2.1 

Make a water lens using necessary items.

By increasing or decreasing the curvature of the lens, get clear images of a lit 
candle placed in different places, without changing the image distance.

Science | Eye and Ear  21

 ² Ray diagram for an image formed from a far object on the retina of eye  

(figure 2.9).

The rays that reach from the far object, can be considered as parallel rays.

Figure 2.9

The rays that reach the eye from the far object, get refracted through the lens and 
converged onto the retina making an image on it.

 ² Ray diagram for an image formed from a close object on the retina of eye 

(figure 2.10). 

The rays that reach from the close object, can be considered as diverged rays.

Figure 2.10

The rays that reach the eye from the close object, get refracted through the lens and 
converged onto the retina making an image on it.

2.2    Defects of vision

Two eye defects can be identified in vision, when the eye ball becomes short or long 
and when eye is unable to adjust the focal length of its lens to the desired level.

 ² Long sight (hypermetropia)
 ² Short sight (myopia)

22

Science | Eye and Ear 

Long sight (hypermetropia)

A person having this defect is able to see far objects clearly, but close objects 
become unclear. This happens because of the inability to increase the curvature of 
the eye lens  or the eye ball being too short. This defect can be corrected by using 
a convex lens.

Let us look at how the vision of a person suffering from long sight takes place.

 ² The  person  can  focus  the  rays 
coming from a distant object on the 
retina to form a sharp image. So, that 
he  can  see  distant  objects  clearly 
(figure 2.11).

 ² The light rays from the nearby 
object  cannot  be  brought  to 
focus  on  the  retina  to  give  a 
distinct  image.  In  this  case  the 
image  is  formed  behind  the 
retina,  as  the  rays  get  focused 
behind the retina (figure 2.12).

Figure 2.11

Figure 2.12

Correcting the long sight
 ² This  defect  can  be  corrected  by  using  a  convex  meniscus  lens.  The  convex 
meniscus lens receives the light rays and converge them. The eye lens converges 
the rays again to focus the image at the retina.

Figure 2.13 - Long sight and its correction

Let us do the activity 2.5 to understand what happens after long sight is corrected.

Science | Eye and Ear  23

Activity 2.5

You will need :- Two convex lenses, a candle, a screen

Method :-

²  Using one convex lens 
get a clear image of a 
distant object on the 
screen.

 ² Get  a  clear  image  of  a 
somewhat  far  object  on 
the screen.

the 

 ² Light the candle in front 
of 
lens  without 
changing  the  distance 
between  the  lens  and 
the screen. Observe the 
blurred image.

 ² Place  the  other  convex 
lens  between  the  first 
the  screen. 
lens  and 
Move  it  until  a  clear 
image  of  the  candle  is 
focused on the screen.

Figure 2.14  a

Figure 2.14  b

Figure 2.14  c

Figure 2.14  d

d

d

d

From the activity 2.5 you can understand that, when nearby objects cannot be seen 
clearly, convex lenses can be used to make the image clear.

24

Science | Eye and Ear 

Short sight (myopia)

A person sees nearby objects clearly while distant objects appear blurred. This 
defect arises because of the inability to reduce the curvature of the eye lens or due 
to the elongation of the eye ball. This defect can be corrected by using a concave 
lens.

Let us look at how the vision of a person suffering from short sight takes place.

 ² The  rays  coming  from  close  objects 
can  be  focused  on  the  retina.  So, 
the  close  objects  can  be  seen  clearly 
(figure 2.15).    

 ² The  rays  coming  from  distant  objects 
are  focused  in  front  of  the  retina.  So, 
the image of a distant object is formed 
in front of the retina and cannot be seen 
clearly (figure 2.16). 

Figure 2.15

Figure 2.16

Correcting the short sight
 ² This defect can be corrected by using concave meniscus lenses. The rays from 
the  object  are  diverged  through  the  concave  meniscus  lens  and  the  eye  lens 
converge them to a point on retina to make the image clear.

Figure 2.17 -  Short sight and its correction

Let  us  do  the  activity  2.6  to  understand  what  happens  after  correcting  the  short 
sight.

Science | Eye and Ear  25

 
                                
 
Activity  2.6

You will need :- A convex lens, a concave lens, candle, screen

Method :-

 ² Light the candle in front 
of  the  convex  lens  and 
get  a  clear  image  of  it 
on the screen.

Figure 2.18  a

d

 ² When the candle is kept far away without changing the distance between 
the  lens  and  the  screen  (distance  “d”),  we  can  get  a  blurred  image  of  a 
distant object on the screen. 

Figure 2.18  b

d

 ² Place a concave lens in front of the convex lens and move it till a clear 

image of the candle is formed on the screen.

Figure 2.18 c

d

From the activity 2.6 it can be understood that when distant objects cannot be seen 
clearly, concave lenses can be used to get a clear image of a distant object.

Binocular vision and stereoscopic vision  

The  eyes  of  human,  monkey,  'Rilava'/'Mandi',  chimpanzee,  gorilla  and  loris  are 
located in front position of the skull (figure 2.19). So, there is a greater chance of 
seeing the same area with both eyes.

26

Science | Eye and Ear 

Human

Monkey

'Rilava' / 'Mandi'

Chimpanzee 

Gorilla
Figure 2.19
Mammals such as cattle, dog, tiger have no ability to look at the same area using 
both  eyes  (figure  2.20).  But,  they  have  the  ability  to  look  more  areas  separately 
using the each eye.  

Loris

Cattle

Dog
Figure 2.20

Tiger

The ability to maintain visual focus on an object with both eyes creating a single 
visual image, is known as binocular vision. The human has a broader range of a 
binocular vision.

The range of binocular vision of man

The range of binocular vision of dog

Figure 2.21

Science | Eye and Ear  27

Let us do the activity 2.7 to identify your range of binocular vision.

Activity 2.7

Method :-
 ² Keep the face straight and look forward.
 ² Do the following things without moving the face.
 ² Stretch your hands and fold your fingers.
 ² Straighten the thumb right upwards.
 ² Close your left eye and move your left hand in the horizontal plane to the left 

until you cannot see the thumb.

 ² Keep the left hand in the same position and close your right eye. Now move 
your right hand in the horizontal plane to your right until you can’t see the 
thumb.

 ² Now look at both thumbs using the both eyes.

Your eyes can see the objects which lie in the range of the stretched hands. It is your 
binocular range. But, when both eyes are open, the objects seen to the left of the left 
hand can be seen only by the left eye. Similarly the objects to the right of the right 
hand can be seen only by the right eye.

Due to the binocular vision human has got the stereoscopic vision and the ability 
to determine the distance of an object. stereoscopic vision means the ability of eye 
to determine the depth of an object or the height of it. Let us do the activity 2.8 to 
study this further.

Activity 2.8

You will need :- A ball point pen 

Method :-
 ² Hold  the  clip  of  the  pen  keeping  its  hole  upwards  in  a  distance  when  you 

stretch the hands to your front.

 ² Close one eye and insert the pen into the clip.
 ²
Insert the pen again into the clip using both eyes.
 ² Compare the difference of ease, in both situations.

It is easier to insert the pen into the clip by seeing through both eyes rather than 
seeing through one eye. This is because of the stereoscopic vision of the eye.

28

Science | Eye and Ear 

2.3    Eye diseases

Two common eye diseases identified at present are;  

 ² Cataract

 ² Glaucoma

Cataract 

A cataract is a cloudiness or opacity in normally transparent crystalline lens of the 

eye. It happens because of the denaturing of proteins in the eye lens. Then, eye lens 

turns in to milky colour.

The lens of a healthy eye is transparent

The lens of a diseased eye is not transparent

Figure 2.22 

Cataract prevents the light rays coming from an object focusing properly on the 

retina. Then, all the objects are seen blurred.

A lens of a healthy eye

A lens of a diseased eye

Figure 2.23 

2.3    Eye diseases
Two common eye diseases identified at present are;  

 ² Cataract
 ² Glaucoma

Cataract 

A cataract is a cloudiness or opacity in normally transparent crystalline lens of the 
eye. It happens because of the denaturing of proteins in the eye lens. Then, eye lens 
turns in to milky colour.

The lens of a healthy eye is transparent

The lens of a diseased eye is not transparent

Figure 2.22 

Cataract prevents the light rays coming from an object focusing properly on the 
retina. Then, all the objects are seen blurred.

A lens of a healthy eye

A lens of a diseased eye

Figure 2.23 

Science | Eye and Ear  29

A healthy eye sees an object clearly

The diseased eye sees the objects blurred

Figure 2.24
Generally, cataract may occur with age and genetic factors. It is believed that ultra 
violet  rays  reach  the  Earth  through  holes  of  the  ozone  layer  affect  towards  the 
occurrence of cataracts in eye.

Glaucoma

Glaucoma is a disease that gradually reduces the visual range of the eye and leads 
to blindness due to the damage of the optic nerve. By detecting at the first stage 
further increase of glaucoma can be controlled. Glaucoma is usually the result of 
high  blood pressure inside the eye. A person with diabetes has an increased risk of 
developing glaucoma. The damage caused to the eye from this disease cannot be 
reversed again.

The figures A, B, C and D shows how a glaucoma patient loses his vision gradually.

  A

  C

  B

  D

A  -  healthy eye sees the objects clearly

B  -   first stage of glaucoma

C  -  middle stage of glaucoma

D  -   final stage of glaucoma (leads to vision loss or blindness)

Figure 2.25

30

Science | Eye and Ear 

Eye infections

In  addition  to  above  mentioned  diseases,  eyes 

can be infected by viruses. Reddening of eye and 

secretion of tears are the symptoms. The disease 

spreads  through  insects  ('Konduruwa')  and  by 

contact. This condition is known as "sore eyes". 

It can be cured by medical treatments (figure 2.26).

Precautionary  measures  should  be  followed  to 

prevent health problems and possible defects of 

the eye. Such precautions are given below.

 ² Protect your eyes from harmful light rays

Figure 2.26

 ² Do not look at the sun directly at a solar eclipse and necessary safety methods 

should be used to look at the sun in such situations

 ² Be sure to wear safety glasses when do welding

 ² Do not use eye drops or any other liquids into the eye without medical advice

 ² Do not use someone else’s spectacles

 ² When using sun glasses follow medical advices

 ² Should care for personal hygiene

 ² Do  not  watch  television  or  use  computers  continuously  and  follow  relevant 

precautionary measures.

2.4   Structure and function of the human ear

Audio sensory organ of the body is the ear. Let us take a look at the structure of the ear.

Activity 2.9

You will need :-  A  model  of  the 

human  ear  in  the 

laboratory  or  a 

diagram

Method :-

 ² Observe 

diagram well. 

the  model  or 

the 

 ²

Identify the parts of the human 

ear.

 ² Get the help of a named diagram 

of the human ear.

Figure 2.27 - A model of the human ear

Eye infections

In  addition  to  above  mentioned  diseases,  eyes 
can be infected by viruses. Reddening of eye and 
secretion of tears are the symptoms. The disease 
spreads  through  insects  ('Konduruwa')  and  by 
contact. This condition is known as "sore eyes". 
It can be cured by medical treatments (figure 2.26).

Precautionary  measures  should  be  followed  to 
prevent health problems and possible defects of 
the eye. Such precautions are given below.

Figure 2.26

 ² Protect your eyes from harmful light rays
 ² Do not look at the sun directly at a solar eclipse and necessary safety methods 

should be used to look at the sun in such situations

 ² Be sure to wear safety glasses when do welding
 ² Do not use eye drops or any other liquids into the eye without medical advice
 ² Do not use someone else’s spectacles
 ² When using sun glasses follow medical advices
 ² Should care for personal hygiene
 ² Do  not  watch  television  or  use  computers  continuously  and  follow  relevant 

precautionary measures.

2.4   Structure and function of the human ear

Audio sensory organ of the body is the ear. Let us take a look at the structure of the ear.

Activity 2.9

You will need :-  A  model  of  the 
human  ear  in  the 
laboratory  or  a 
diagram

Method :-
 ² Observe 

the  model  or 

the 

 ²

diagram well. 
Identify the parts of the human 
ear.

 ² Get the help of a named diagram 

of the human ear.

Figure 2.27 - A model of the human ear

Science | Eye and Ear  31

A diagram of the human ear is given by figure 2.28.

Outer ear

Middle ear Inner ear

Pinna

Ossicles Semi-circular canals

External 
auditory canal

Tympanic 
membrane

Figure 2.28

Auditory nerve

Cochlea

Eustachian tube

Information about the major parts of the human ear is given in the table 2.2.

Table 2.2 - Information about the major parts of the human ear

Area

Part of the organ

Pinna/ear lobe

Outer 
ear

External auditory canal

Tympanic membrane

Ossicles

Middle 
ear

Eustachian  tube

Cochlea

Auditory nerve

Inner 
ear

Semi-circular canals 

32

Science | Eye and Ear 

Information

 ² A cartilaginous organ
 ² Directs sound waves towards the auditory canal
 ² Directs the sound to tympanic membrane
 ² Vibrates in response to the sound wave and acquires 
    the auditory senses
 ² Three bones named malleus, incus and stapes
 ² Transmit sound related vibration to the cochlea
 ² An open tube connected to pharynx
 ² Controls  the pressure on either sides of the tympanic 
    membrane
 ² The nerve endings of the auditory nerve is connected 

to cochlea

 ² Transmit auditory senses to the auditory nerve
 ² Take auditory senses to the relevant part of the 
    brain
 ² That sound is interpreted by the relevant part of the 
    brain
 ² Contribute to maintain the balance of body

Let us see how the ear perceives auditory senses.  

Do  the  activity  2.10  to  demonstrate  how  a  membrane  is  vibrated  according  to  a 

sound.

Activity 2.10

a tuning folk

Method :-

You will need :- Two funnels, sheath of a balloon, 2m length rubber tube, a thread, 

 ² Tighten well the balloon sheath to the mouth of a funnel.

 ² Join the two funnels to the open ends of the 2m length rubber tube.

 ² Keep the funnel with the balloon sheath to one of the student's ear and vibrate 

the tuning folk near the other funnel.

 ² Report your observations.

Figure 2.29

When  the  folk  is  vibrated  the  rubber  sheath  too  vibrates  and  the  sound  is  better 

heard. Similarly, correspond to the sound wave the tympanic membrane vibrates.

The sound waves created by the vibrations of the objects in the external environment, 

travels  to  tympanic  membrane  along  the  external  auditory  canal.  The  tympanic 

membrane is vibrated accordingly. The vibrations are then transmitted to cochlea 

through ossicles. The nerve endings connected to cochlea take the auditory senses 

to the auditory nerve. The auditory nerve transmits the impulse to the relevant part 

of the brain. The sound is interpreted by the auditory area of the brain. 

2.5   Defects of ear

Disorders such as impaired hearing, deafness, hardening of ossicles may occur in 

ears while living or from the birth. It is also said that people who are deaf from birth 

are dumb too. Hearing aids can be used as a remedy for loss of hearing.

You know that 20 Hz - 20 000 Hz is the audible range of the human ear. There 

is also a limited intensity of sound in this range that the ear can tolerate. Sounds 

beyond that range can damage the ear.

Necessary precautions should be taken to protect
the ear.
 ² Avoid inserting foreign objects into the ear
 ² Refrain exposing to loud noises
 ² Do  not  put  any  medicines  for  the  ear  without 

medical advice

 ² Avoid  diving  in  deep  waters  without  wearing 
safety equipment (As pressure is very high in deep 
water)

 ² Avoid slapping on the ear and dragging by the ear lobe

Assignment 2.2

 y Using suitable materials, make a model of a stethoscope.

Figure 2.30

Assignment 2.3

 y Prepare ten short questions on eye and ear to conduct a quiz competition.

Figure 2.31

For extra knowledge

Jet Engine

Sound pressure level dB(A)
Threshold of pain

Live rock music

Street Traffic

Conversational speech

Bedroom

Jackhammer

Heavy truck

Business office

Living room

Woodland

34

Science | Eye and Ear 

Summary

 ² Optical sensory organ of the body is the eye.
 ²

Images that are real, inverted and smaller than the object formed on the retina 
are interpreted by the brain. This is known as vision.

 ² Binocular vision of human is important to determine the distance of an object 

and stereoscopic vision.

 ² The most common defects of vision are long sight and short sight.
 ² Long sight can be corrected by using a convex lens while short sight can be 

corrected by using a concave lens.

 ² Most frequent eye diseases at present are cataract and glaucoma.
 ² To maintain a healthy vision for a long period of  time, necessary precautions 

should be taken to protect the eye.

 ² Audio sensory organ of the body is the ear.
 ² Sound waves vibrate the tympanic membrane and the cochlea in the ear. This 

results the stimulation of the nerve endings at the cochlea.

 ² This  auditory  impulse  is  carried  to  the  brain  by  the  auditory  nerve  and  the 

relevant part of the brain interpret the sound. This is known as hearing.
 ² The semi-circular canals contribute to maintain the balance of the body.
 ² Hardening of ossicles, impaired hearing and deafness are some disorders of 

hearing.

 ² The range of audibility of the human ear is between 20 Hz - 20 000 Hz.
 ² The sounds of higher intensities may damage the ear.
 ² Necessary precautions must be followed to protect the ear.

Exercise

01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.

1.  The part that an image focuses on the human eye is,
2. Eye lens
4. Retina

1. Vitreous humour  
3. Iris 

2.  The defect that close objects can be seen clearly, but distant objects can be 

seen blurred is,

1. Long sight 
3. Cataract   

2. Glaucoma
4. Short sight

3.  The organ in the ear that maintain the balance of body is,

1. Cochlea   
3. Ossicles   

2. External auditory canal
4. Semi-circular canals

Science | Eye and Ear  35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Following are some statements that a student wrote about the ear and its 

functions.

a. Ear lobes are cartilaginous.
b. Cochlea transmits auditory senses to the auditory nerve.
c. Ossicles are located in the external auditory canal.

1. a and b only 
3. a and c only 

2. b and c only
4. a, b and c all

5.  The range of audibility of the human ear is,

1. 2 Hz - 20 000 Hz  
3. 20 Hz - 200 000 Hz 

2. 20 Hz - 20 000 Hz
4. 200 Hz - 20 000 Hz

02) Following figure shows the structure of the human eye. 

  H

  G

  F

  A

  B

  E

  C

  D

 I

Write down the names and functions of each part in the eye denoted by English  
letters A to H.

36

Science | Eye and Ear 

 
 
  
 
03) Using given English letters, mention the path of the auditory impulse that 

start from ear to the brain.

A

  E

  G

  F

  H

  K

  J

  B

  C

  D

Technical Terms

Long sight
Short sight

Binocular vision
Stereoscopic vision
Retina
Optic nerve
Cornea
Iris
Pupil
Fovea
Blind spot
Convex lens
Concave lens
Cataract
Glaucoma
Tympanic membrane
Cochlea
Ossicles
Eustachian tube
Auditory nerve
Semi-circular canals

- ÿr oDIaál;ajh
- wúÿr oDIaál;ajh

- ÷\´ø©¨ £õºøÁ
- Asø©¨ £õºøÁ
- C¸ÂÈ¨£õºøÁ
- •¨£›©õÚ¨ £õºøÁ
- ÂÈzvøμ
- £õºøÁ |μ®¦
- ÂÈöÁs£h»®
- PvμõÎ
- Ps©o
- ©g\Îh®
- S¸mih®
- SÂÄ ÂÀø»
- SÈÄ ÂÀø»
- PmPõ\®
- SÐU÷Põ©õ
- ö\Â¨£øÓ ö©ß\ÆÄ
- |zøua_¸Ò
- ö\Âa ]ØöÓß¦PÒ
- Fz÷uUQ¯õÂß SÇõ´
- ö\Â|μ®¦

- oaúfka;%sl oDIaáh
- ;%sudK oDIaáh
- oDIaáú;dkh
- oDIaál iakdhqj
- iajÉph
- ;drduKav,h
- lKsksldj
- ly ,mh
- wkaO ìkaÿj
- W;a;, ldph
- wj;, ldph
- wefia iqo
- .aÆfldaudj
- l¾Kmgy mg,h
- l¾K ixLh
- l¾K wiaÓld
- hqiafÜlSh kd<h
- Y%jK iakdhqj
- w¾O pl%dldr kd< - Aøμ ÁmhUPõÀÁõ´

Science | Eye and Ear  37

3

Nature and 
Properties of Matter

Recall  what  you  have  learnt  about  the  properties  of  matter  in  grade  8. You  may 
call back to your mind how matter was classified as pure substances and non-pure 
substances (mixtures). Based on that knowledge engage in the activity 3.1. 

Activity 3.1

Classify and tabulate the substances given below as pure substances and mixtures. 

air,  drinking  water,  aluminium,  silver,  copper,  salt  solution,  distilled  water, 
carbon, sulphur, zinc, copper sulphate, sodium chloride 

Matter that contain  only  one  constituent with  specific  properties are  called  pure 
substances. Accordingly, aluminium, silver, copper, distilled water, carbon, sulphur, 
zinc, copper sulphate and sodium chloride belong to the class of pure substances. 

Matter that contain two or more constituents are known as mixtures. Hence, air, 
drinking water and salt solution can be named as mixtures. 

In grade 8 you have learnt that pure substances can be further classified as elements 
and compounds. To strengthen that knowledge further, involve in the activity 3.2. 

Activity 3.2 

Classify and tabulate the following pure substances as elements and compounds. 
sulphur, glucose, chlorine, sodium chloride, silver, copper, copper sulphate, zinc 

The pure substances with specific properties which, cannot be further divided by 
either physical or chemical methods into substances with different properties, are 
called elements. Accordingly iron, sulphur, chlorine, silver, zinc and copper belong 
to elements. There are about 120 elements have been discovered  upto now. 

38

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

Copper

Iron

Sulphur

Mercury

Carbon

Aluminium

Silver

Chlorine

 Figure 3.1- Some common elements

The  compounds  are  pure  substances  with  specific  properties,  formed  by  the 

chemical  combination  of  two  or  more  elements  in  a  fixed  ratio.  Thus,  sodium 

chloride, copper sulphate and glucose belong to the class of compounds. In nature, 

there are very large number of compounds, which occur from the combination of 

various elements in various forms.  

Glucose

Copper sulphate 

Sodium chloride

Figure 3.2 - Some common compounds

3.1    Elements 

3.1.1    Symbols for elements 

We  know  that,  in  various  instances  we  use  various  symbols  to  facilitate 

communication. Symbols are also used to indicate elements. All countries in the 

world use these internationally accepted symbols to indicate elements. 

Very often, English name of the element is used as the base for these symbols. In 

such case the first letter of the name of the element is used as the symbol. When a 

single letter is used as the symbol, compulsorily it should be a capital letter. Table 

3.1 presents some examples. 

Copper

Iron

Sulphur

Mercury

Carbon

Aluminium

Silver

Chlorine

 Figure 3.1- Some common elements

The  compounds  are  pure  substances  with  specific  properties,  formed  by  the 
chemical  combination  of  two  or  more  elements  in  a  fixed  ratio.  Thus,  sodium 
chloride, copper sulphate and glucose belong to the class of compounds. In nature, 
there are very large number of compounds, which occur from the combination of 
various elements in various forms.  

Glucose

Copper sulphate 
Figure 3.2 - Some common compounds

Sodium chloride

3.1    Elements 

3.1.1    Symbols for elements 

We  know  that,  in  various  instances  we  use  various  symbols  to  facilitate 
communication. Symbols are also used to indicate elements. All countries in the 
world use these internationally accepted symbols to indicate elements. 

Very often, English name of the element is used as the base for these symbols. In 
such case the first letter of the name of the element is used as the symbol. When a 
single letter is used as the symbol, compulsorily it should be a capital letter. Table 
3.1 presents some examples. 

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

39

Table 3.1

Element

Carbon 
Oxygen 
Sulphur 

Symbol
C
O
S

When the names of several elements commence in the same letter, the next letter 
or another letter in the name is added to the symbol. In that, the second letter is a 
simple letter. Table 3.2 gives some examples. 

Table 3.2

Element

Chlorine 
Calcium 
Magnesium
Aluminium 

Symbol
Cl
Ca
Mg
Al

In  some  elements,  the  symbol  originates  in  its  Latin  name. Table  3.3  lists  some 
examples for such symbols. 

English name

Sodium
Copper
Lead
Gold 
Mercury
Iron
Silver

Table 3.3

Latin Name Symbol
Natrium
Cuprum
Plumbum
Aurum
Hydrargyrum
Ferrum
Argentum

Na
Cu
Pb
Au
Hg
Fe
Ag

Table 3.4 illustrates names of several elements and their symbols. 

Element

Hydrogen
Carbon
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Sulphur
Chlorine
Aluminium

Symbol
H
C
O
N
S
Cl
Al

Table 3.4

Element

Magnesium
Zinc
Silicon
Phosphorous
Argon
Calcium
Iodine

Symbol
Mg
Zn
Si
P
Ar
Ca
I

40

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

3.1.2   Building units of elements 

You have learnt that, matter is composed of particles. These 
particles cannot be observed by the naked eye or even by 
the  powerful  microscopes.  These  very  small  particles  are 
called atoms. 

John Dalton (1766 - 1844) was the first scientist to use the 
term atom for the smallest, indivisible particle from which 
the matter is made. The English name 'atom' for this particle 
has  originated  from  the  Greek  word  'atomos'  meaning, 
"cannot be divided further."

Figure 3.3 - John Dalton

An element is composed of the atoms of the same type. The atoms which, form 
different elements are different to each other. For example, the element iron is formed 
from iron atoms. Aluminium is formed from aluminium atoms. The structures of 
aluminium atoms and iron atoms differ from each other. 

The units formed by the combination of one or more atoms of the same type or one 
or more atoms of different types are called molecules.  

Under normal conditions, the element oxygen exists as oxygen molecules composed 
of two oxygen atoms. The smallest form in which oxygen can exist independently 
is a molecule. Some examples for the elements which can exist as molecules are 
given in table 3.5.    

Table 3.5 

Element

Oxygen    (O)

Nitrogen   (N)

Chlorine   (Cl)

Hydrogen (H)

Fluorine    (F)

Symbol of the 
molecule
O2
 N2
Cl2
H2
F2

O

O

H H

Figure 3.4 -
A representation
of an Oxygen molecule

Figure 3.5 -
A representation
of a Hydrogen molecule

Since the above molecules are formed by the atoms of the same elements they are 
known as  homo-atomic molecules. 

Therefore,  elements  are  composed  either,  from  atoms  of  the  same  kind  or  from 
molecules formed by combining those same kind of atoms. Thus, they cannot be 
further divided into simple substances chemically. 

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

41

Atomic number (Z)

The  number  of  protons  present  in  the  nucleus  of  a  given  atom  of  an  element  is 
called the atomic number. It is generally designated by the symbol Z. The atomic 
number or the number of protons in the nucleus is a unique property of the element. 
As an atom is electrically neutral, number of protons and number of electrons are 
equal. The atomic numbers of some elements are given in table 3.7. 

Table 3.7 – Atomic number of atoms of some elements 

Element
Carbon (C)
Nitrogen (N)
Oxygen (O)
Fluorine (F)
Neon (Ne)
Sodium (Na)

Number of Protons Number of Electrons Atomic Number
6
7
8
9
10
11

6
7
8
9
10
11

6
7
8
9
10
11

Mass number (A)

The sum of the protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of a given atom of an 
element, is called the mass number of the atom of that element. The mass number 
is represented by the symbol A.

Table 3.8 - Mass number of atoms of some elements

Element Number of protons 

N
O
F
Na
Cl

(p)

7
8
9
11
17

Number of Neutrons
(n)
7
8
10
12
18

Mass number 
(p + n)
14
16
19
23
35

There is a standard method of representing atomic number and mass number of an 
atom. This standard method is, writing atomic number at the left hand side bottom 
end and mass number at the left hand side top end of the symbol of the atom. The 
information related to an atom of element sodium (Na) is given below. 

Sum of protons and neutrons 
(Mass number) 

Number of protons 
(Atomic number) 

23
11Na

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

43

3.2    Compounds

Compounds  are  formed  by  the  chemical  combination  of  two  or  more  elements 
in  a  certain  ratio.  Some  of  those  compounds  exist  in  nature  as  molecules.  Since 
those molecules contain atoms that are different from one another, they are called 
hetero-atomic molecules.

e.g.   A Hydrogen chloride molecule is formed by the combination of  

one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom. 

H

Cl

H Cl

Hydrogen atom

Chlorine atom

Hydrogen chloride molecule (compound)

Figure 3.8 -  Illustration of the formation of a hydrogen chloride molecule

Thus, a main difference between elements and compounds 
is that an element is composed of the atoms of the same 
kind while a compound is formed from atoms belonging 
to two or more kinds of elements. 

e.g.  A water molecule is formed by the  

combination of an oxygen atom and two  
 hydrogen atoms. This is illustrated by figure 3.9.

O

H

H

Figure 3.9 - Water molecule 

Assignment 3.1

Using various materials create models for several homo-atomic and hetero-atomic 
molecules. Display the models you made in the classroom.

A  carbon  dioxide  molecule  is  formed  by  the 
combination of a carbon atom and two oxygen 
atoms. This is shown by figure 3.10. 

O

OC

Figure 3.10 -  Carbon dioxide molecule

H

H

C

H

H

A methane molecule is formed by the combination 
of a carbon atom with four hydrogen atoms. This is 
illustrated by figure 3.11. 

Figure 3.11 - Methane molecule 

44

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An  ammonia  molecule  is  formed  by  the  combination 
of  a  nitrogen  atom  with  three  hydrogen  atoms.  This  is 
illustrated by figure 3.12. 

There  are  specific  chemical  symbols  for  compounds 
also. These symbols are known as chemical formula of 
compounds. You will study them in higher grades. 

Compound 

Table 3.9

Chemical formula 
of the compound 
(Building unit of the 
compound) 

H

N

H

H

Figure 3.12 -  Ammonia 
molecule

Elements contained

Water
Glucose

Methane 

Carbon dioxide

Sodium chloride (Common salt)

Copper sulphate

Calcium carbonate

H2O
C6H12O6
CH4
CO2
NaCl
CuSO4
CaCO3

H and O

C, H and O

C and H

C and O

Na and Cl

Cu, S and O

Ca, C and O

The elements contained in the smallest unit that form a compound, cannot show the 
properties of that compound. 

The different compounds formed by even the same set of elements have different 
chemical properties. 

e.g. 1: Same compounds formed by the set of elements C, H are given below.

 y Methane (a component of biogas) 
- CH4
 y Hexane (a solvent) 
- C6H14
 y Benzene (a solvent) 
- C6H6
 y Acetylene (a gas burnt to generate heat essential for welding metals)   - C2H2
 y Ethene (a gaseous raw material needed to make polythene) 
- C2H4

e.g. 2 :  Given below are some compounds formed by the set of elements  

C, H, O

y Glucose (a simple sugar) 
 y Acetic acid (contained in vinegar) 
 y Ethanol (contained in alcoholic beverages) 
 y Dimethyl ether (an anaesthetic) 
 y Sucrose (contained in sugar cane) 

- C6H12O6
- CH3COOH
- C2H5OH
- CH3OCH3
- C12H22O11

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3    Mixtures 

Next, let us study about the non-pure substances (mixtures). 

Pay your attention to sea water. Various salts and various gases are dissolved in it. 
That means, it contains several constituents. Therefore, sea water is a mixture. In 
natural environment mostly we come across mixtures and not pure substances. Air, 
soil, river water and rocks around us are all mixtures. Yoghurt, ice cream and fruit 
salad we eat are also mixtures. The drinks such as tea, coffee and soft drinks too 
are mixtures.

Fruit salad

Coffee

Figure 3.13 - Some mixtures

Ice cream

Mixtures  are  formed  when  two  or  more  pure  substances  get  mixed.  The  pure 
substances in a mixture are called as constituents. 

Let us identify constituents in some mixtures. Let us study table 3.10. 

Table 3.10 - Mixtures and their constituents

Mixture 

Constituents

Air

nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, water vapour

Sea water

water, salts, dissolved oxygen, dissolved carbon dioxide  

Cake mixture

sugar, flour, water, colouring, butter, eggs

Crude oil

diesel, petrol, kerosene, tar

The  specific  feature  of  a  mixture  is  that,  its  constituents  can  be  separated  by 
physical methods. When rice is mixed with sand they can be separated by sifting 
using the sifting bowl. So, sifting is a physical method of separating constituents 
in a mixture. Let us involve in activity 3.3 to study about the physical methods of 
separating constituents in a mixture. 

46

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

Activity 3.3

 ² You are provided with the following mixtures. Suggest suitable methods for 

separating the constituents in those mixtures. 

1.  A mixture of sugar and sand
2.  A mixture of salt and water
3.  A mixture of iron powder and sulphur powder
4.  A mixture of rice and sand
5.  A mixture of chaff and stone

 ² Describe how the constituents of the mixtures are separated.

Given below are some physical methods of separating constituents in a mixture and 
some instances in which they are used. They will be studied in detail in grade 11.

- Separating sand from rice, Separating gems from ores
- Separating chaff from rice
- Separating sterile seeds from seed paddy
- Separating gravel from sand
- Obtaining salt from sea water

Panning  
Winnowing
Floating on water
Sifting 
Evaporation 
Fractional distillation - Separating various fuels from crude oil
Steam distillation
Crystallization 
Uses of magnets

- Separating cinnamon oil from cinnamon leaves 
- Separating sugar from cane sugar syrup
- Separating some minerals from mineral sands

Figure 3.14 - Gem mining

Figure 3.15 -  Winnowing paddy

Assignment 3.2 

Prepare a chart to show the physical methods used to separate constituents of a 
mixture and the instance in which those methods are used. 

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

47

According to that, mixtures can be described as follows. 

A matter which consists of two or more constituents which can be separated by 
physical methods are called mixtures.

According to the nature, mixtures can be divided into two categories.

1.  Homogeneous mixtures

2.  Heterogeneous mixtures

Homogeneous mixtures

Let us involve in activity 3.4 to study about homogeneous mixtures. 

Activity 3.4

1.  Weigh about 2 g of salt, add it to a beaker containing 500 ml of water, mix 

well with a glass rod and allow to stand for a few minutes.

2.  Observe carefully.

You  will  be  able  to  see  that  properties  like  colour  and  transparency  are  alike 
throughout the mixture. The mixtures with a uniform composition right throughout 
the mixture are called homogeneous mixtures. 

e.g. 

Salt solution, sugar solution, sea water

Heterogeneous mixtures
Dissolve a little clay in water, allows to stand from some time and observe. If you 
observe carefully you may be able to see that the colour and transparency of the 
mixture is different from place to place.  

The mixtures in which the composition is not uniform throughout the mixture are 
known as heterogeneous mixtures. 

e.g.   Muddy water, mortar mixture, ice cream, fruit salad

Assignment 3.3

 ² Prepare mixtures by mixing each of the following with small amount of water 

and observe these mixtures. 

      salt, soap, copper sulphate, limestone, washing blue, chilli powder
 ² Record the observations
 ² Classify the mixtures you have prepared as homogeneous and heterogeneous.

48

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

 
 
Summary

 ² Matter can be classified as pure substances and non-pure substances (mixtures).
 ² Pure substances can be further classified as elements and compounds.
 ² The  pure  substances  which  bear  specific  properties  and  cannot  be  further 
divided  into  substances  with  different  properties  by  physical  or  chemical 
methods are called elements.

 ² The  pure  substances  which  have  specific  properties  and  are  formed  by  the 
chemical combination of two or more elements in a definite ratio are termed 
as compounds.

 ² Atoms and molecules are the building units of elements.  
 ² Homo-atomic  molecules  are  formed  by  the  combination  of  two  or  more 
atoms of the same kind whereas hetero-atomic molecules are formed by the 
combination of two or more atoms of different kinds.

 ² The atom consists of subatomic particles.
 ² Electrons, protons and neutrons are the subatomic particles in an atom. 
 ² An atom comprises a large empty space and a positively charged nucleus at 

the centre of it. 

 ² Protons and neutrons are contained in the nucleus. Electrons move around the 

nucleus.

 ² The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is called the atomic number 

of that element. It is a unique property for that element. 

 ² The sum of the protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom is called the 

mass number.

 ² Mixtures are matter consisting of two or more pure constituents that can be 

separated by physical methods. 

 ² Mixtures  can  be  classified  as  homogeneous  mixtures  and  heterogeneous 

mixtures. 

Exercise

01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.

1. The number of protons, neutrons and electrons in the 35
2. 17, 18, 17

1. 17, 18, 18

3. 17, 17, 18

17Cl  atom respectively are,

4. 17, 17, 17

2. Of  the following statements given about the atom, select the false statement.

1. Atoms are the building units of matter.
2. A large portion of an atom is empty space.
3. There is a positively charged nucleus at the center of an atom.
4. An atom cannot be further divided.

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

49

3. A unique property for a certain atom is,

1.  its atomic number
2.  the number of neutrons in the nucleus 
3.  its mass number
4.  the sum of the number of neutrons and protons

4. Which of the following contains matter belonging to the same set?

1. sodium, carbon, oxygen
3. water, carbon, sodium

2. oxygen, water, air,
4. air, carbon, oxygen

5. Of the following statements given about the element nitrogen, select the false 

statement.

1. Nitrogen is a pure substance.
2. Nitrogen molecules are the building units of nitrogen.
3. Nitrogen  molecule  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  a  large  number  of 

nitrogen atoms.

4. Nitrogen is a constituent of air.

6. Of the following substances given, the pure substance is,

1.  air
3.  vinegar

2.  salt solution
4.  copper sulphate 

02) Fill in the blanks considering proton and neutron amounts of particular 

elements.

Element 

Sodium
Calcium
Iron
Sulphur
Bromine

Number of 
protons
11
......................
......................
......................
35

Number of 
neutrons
......................
20
......................
16
......................

Atomic 
number
......................
20
26
16
......................

Mass number

23
......................
56
......................
80

03) Indicate whether the mixtures given below are homogeneous or heterogeneous.

1.  Tea

2.  Sea sand

3.  Rice  mixed  with 

4.  Vinegar

5.  Copper sulphate solution

chaff

50

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

04) Copy the following figure on classification of matter in your book and fill 

in the blanks. 

Matter

Mixtures

Compounds

05)  Give short answers.

1. Name three pure elements and three pure compounds.

2. Write  the  formulae  of  three  compounds  which  you  know  and  name  the 

elements in them.

3. Write  the  chemical  symbols  and  names  of  five  elements  symbolized  by  a 

single letter.

4. Write the chemical symbols and names of five elements symbolized by two 

letters.

Technical Terms

Atom
Molecule
Matter
Elements
Nucleus
Proton
Electron
Neutron
Homogeneous mixture
Heterogeneous mixture
Compounds
Atomic number
Mass number
Homo-atomic molecules
Hetero-atomic molecules

- Aq
- mrudKqj
- ‰»UTÖ
- wKqj
- @©mhµ
- mod¾:h
- ‰»P[PÒ
- uQ,øjH
- P¸
- kHIaáh
- ¦÷µõzuß
- fm%dafgdak
- C»zvµß
- bf,lafg%dak
- {²zvµß
- kshqfg%dak
- HPÂÚU P»øÁ
- iucd;sh ñY%Kh
- úIucd;sh ñY%Kh - £À¼ÚU P»øÁ
- ÷\ºøÁPÒ
- ixfhda.
- mrudKql l%udxlh - AqöÁs
- voöÁs
- ialkaO l%udxlh
- HPÂÚ Aq‰»UTÖPÒ
- iumrudKql wKq
- £À¼Ú Aq‰»UTÖPÒ
- úIumrudKql wKq

Science | Nature and Properties of Matter

51

Basic Concepts 
Associated with Force

4

4.1   Force

Let us consider situations like lifting an object, pushing a table, opening or closing 
a door or hitting a ball  (figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1
In such instances what we do is, pulling or pushing the object. Such a pulling or 
pushing is called a force, simply a force means a pull or a push. 

When we push a book on the table, it moves. A ball moves faster if we kick it. But, 
you can not push and move a wall. A single person cannot push and move a bus or 
a lorry. Thus, it is clear that, sometimes we can move an object by applying a force 
and sometimes a force cannot result any motion. 

When you catch a ball that comes towards you, a force is applied to stop it. When 
you hit a ball with a bat, you apply a force to change the direction and the speed of 
the ball. 

You can press a ball by keeping it on the ground and tread on it. Here, you change 
the shape of the ball by applying a force.

Accordingly, by applying a force;

 ²
 ²
 ²
 ²
 ²

object at rest can be moved.

object in motion can be stopped.

the speed of motion can be changed.

the direction of motion can be changed.

the shape of object can be changed.

52

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

4.2     Magnitude of force

A ball can be moved slowly by hitting slightly. If you hit it harder it moves fast. 

When  hitting  slowly,  it  applies  a  small  force.  Hitting  fast,  applies  a  large  force. 

Thus, it is clear that the force has a magnitude. 

There are several equipment that can be used to measure the magnitude of a force. 

Spring  balance  is  a  simple  equipment  used  for  this  purpose. What  is  inside  of  a 

spring balance is a spring, that changes its length according to the force applied. It 

is calibrated according to the stretched length of the spring. 

There  are  several  units  to  measure  the  magnitude  of  a  force.  According  to  the 

international system (SI) of units, magnitude of force is measured in Newtons (N). 

There are spring balances in school laboratories, which are calibrated in Newtons. 

But, spring balances which are used for commercial purposes are usually calibrated 

in grams (g) or kilograms (kg).

Do the activity 4.1 to understand how a spring balance can be used to measure a force.

Activity 4.1

You will need :-  A Newton spring balance, a piece of stone, a wooden 

block, a helical spring, a piece of thread, a metal hook, 

a G-Clamp

Method :- 

 ² Tie the stone by a piece of thread.

 ² Hang the stone on the spring balance as shown in figure 4.2, and 

 ² This reading gives the magnitude of the gravitational force exerted 

by the Earth on the piece of stone. This is known as the weight of 

take the reading. 

the stone.

Figure 4.2 

Figure 4.3

 ² Fix the metal hook to the wooden block.

 ² Connect the spring balance to the hook as shown in 

figure 4.3. Pull the spring balance, while keeping 

it  horizontally,  till  the  block  just  starts  to  move. 

Take  the  reading  of  the  spring  balance.  It  is  the 

magnitude  of  the  force  exerted  by  your  hand  on 

the wooden block. 

Figure 4.4

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

53

Activity 4.2 

You will need :- A wooden block, few tintex nails, some thread

Method :- 
 ² Fix a nail at the mid point on one side of the 
wooden block. Tie a piece of thread to the nail 
(figure  4.7),  so  that  the  thread  is  leaning  on 
the block.

Figure 4.7

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4.7 -  The wooden block on the table viewed from the top
 ² Place  the  wooden  block  on  the  table  as  in  figure  4.7  (a),  and  pull  it  by  the 
thread, keeping the thread horizontally. Observe the direction of motion of the 
wooden block.

 ² Then, change the direction of the thread to a side, while keeping it horizontally 
as in figure 4.7 (b) and draw. Observe the direction of motion of the wooden 
block.

You  can  observe  that  the  wooden  block  moves  in  the  direction  of  pull  as  in  the 
figure 4.7 (a) of the above activity. When the direction of pulling is changed as in 
figure 4.7 (b), the direction of motion of the wooden block changes as shown in 
figure 4.7 (c).

Thus, it can be concluded as follows.
 ² The force acts to the direction of pulling, along the thread.
 ² The object moves along the direction of force exerted. 

Activity 4.3 

You will need:-   A wooden block, a circular wooden disc, few tintex nails, some 

thread

Method :-
 ² Fix tintex nails to the points A, B and C on the upper 
surface of the wooden block as shown in figure 4.8.
 ² Fix a nail to the center of the wooden disc as shown in 

figure 4.9.

A

C

B

Figure 4.8

54

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

55

 ² Now tie a piece of thread to the nail A of the wooden block and pull the thread, 
keeping it horizontally. Observe the direction of motion of the wooden block . 

Moreover the length of the straight line drawn to denote the force of 10 N on X 
should be twice as long as the one drawn to denote the force of 5 N on Y. 

In our day-to-day life, we apply forces on various objects. When we write with a 
pen, we have to apply forces to move the pen on the sheet of paper. When walking, 
forces are applied on the floor by our feet. When playing cricket, forces are applied 
on the ball by hitting the bat. To move the bat, the player has to apply force on the 
bat.

(a)

Figure 4.11

(b)

We have to make an effort to do these types of work. Most of the time, we apply 
forces in the easiest way to reduce effort. For example, let us consider the figure 
4.11 (a). A person drawing a loaded cart is shown there. He applies a horizontal 
force, because the cart should be moved horizontally. But, the person has to bend 
and pull with a difficulty to maintain the horizontal force. This difficulty can easily 
be overcome by drawing the cart to a direction shown in figure 4.11 (b). Although 
the force is not applied horizontally, the cart moves to the direction we want. What 
we do here is changing the direction of force to make the work easy.

(a)

Figure 4.12

(b)

A person pushing a loaded cart is shown in the figure 4.12 (a). The person has to 
bend and push it with difficulty. To ease the work, a wooden or metal handle can be 
fitted to the cart and the point where the force is applied (point of application) can 
be changed (figure 4.12 (b)).

In our day-to-day life, we select the way of applying forces in such a way, that the 
work is handled easier. What is applied here is not merely the scientific knowledge, 
but our practical experiences also contribute a lot. But, if there is some knowledge 
about forces, our tasks can be fulfilled easier.

56

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

57

Summary  

 ²
 Force is a pull or a push.
 ² When a force is applied,

 ■

 ■

 ■

 ■

an object at rest can be moved.
an object in motion can be stopped.
the speed of motion can be changed.
the direction of motion can be changed.
the shape of an object can be changed.
 ² Standard unit of measuring force is Newton (N).
 ² Newton spring balance is used to measure the magnitude of a force.
 ² Force has a direction and a magnitude. Therefore, force is a vector quantity. 
 ² The point on which the force is acting on the object is known as the point of 

 ■

application of the force. 

 ² Day-to-day life activities can be done easily by changing the direction and 

the point of application of a force. 

Exercise

01) Select the correct or most suitable answer. 

1. The weight of an object is a force. What is the unit of measurement of weight?
      1.  kg 

2.   kg s            3. N 

 4.  N s

2.  Force is considered as a vector quantity, because it has,  
             2. a point of application.
     1. a magnitude. 
             4. a magnitude and a direction.
     3. a direction. 

3.  A force can be graphically represented by a straight line. Consider the following 

statements in this regard.

      a.   The magnitude of force is denoted by the length of the straight line.
      b.  The direction of force is denoted by the arrow head on the line.
       c.   The point of application of the force is indicated by the mid point of 

     the straight line.
     The true statements are;
     1. a and b only 
     3. b and c only  

       2. a and c only
       4. a, b, and c all

58

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

Science | Basic Concepts Associated with Force

59

 
 
 
Pressure Exerted by Solid

5

5.1   Pressure

You may have experienced that, when the strap of your school bag is narrow, it is 
uncomfortable to the shoulder. When it is broad it is not that uncomfortable. 

(a) A child bearing a bag with a 
narrow strap uncomfortably

(b) A child bearing a bag with a 
broad strap easily

Figure 5.1

There are two school bags of equal weight. The shoulder strap of one of them is 
narrow and that of the other one is broad. Though, the strap is narrow or broad, the 
force exerted by the weight of school bag is the same. But, when the strap of it is 
narrow, the contact area is less, and when it is broad that area is more.

Thus it is clear that, though the force is the same, the pressure against the shoulder 
differs with the area of contact of the strap.

Consider two bags having the straps of the same breadth and different weights of 
books. The bag with more weight gives more press against the shoulder.  

(a) A child bearing a light-weight bag 
easily

(b) A child bearing a heavy bag 
uneasily

Figure 5.2

60 Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

The force exerted by the weight of the school bag, is distributed through out the 

area of contact. It is the distributed force, that is felt by the shoulder. 

When the strap of the bag is broad, the force is distributed over a large area. Hence, 

the pressure felt by the shoulder is less. In these instances, it is useful to know the 

force exerted over a unit area. 

The force exerted over a unit area is known as the pressure.

5.2      Factors affecting the pressure

Let us do activity 5.1 to study the factors affecting the pressure.

Activity 5.1

You will need :-   several  cakes  of  soap,  thin  metal  wire,  several  bags  of  sand 

with the weight of 10 N each, a piece of plank which is longer 

than the length of the cake of soap and similar in breadth of the 

same, a stop watch

Method :- 

 ² Place the cake of soap on 

the  plank  which  is  kept 

on two tables as shown in 

the figure 5.3.

 ² Hang one sand bag on the 

wire which is sent round 

the cake of soap. Observe 

what happens.

Cake of 

soap

Plank

Table

Table

Wire

Sand 

bag

Figure 5.3

 ²

Increase the number of sand bags one by one using a new cake of soap in each 

instance. Measure the time taken to pass the metal wire through each cake of soap.

 ² Tabulate your readings as shown below.

Instance

 No. of sand bags 

Weight of sand 

Time taken to cut through 

bags (N)

the cake of soap (s)

-

Table 5.1

10

20

hung

01

02

01

02

03

04

In the activity 5.1, sometimes one sand bag will not be enough for the wire to cut 

through the cake of soap. If it is so, the reason is that the force exerted by the weight 

of one sand bag is not enough to cut the cake of soap. When the number of sand 

bags are being increased, time taken for the wire to cut through the cake of soap 

becomes less.  

 
The force exerted by the weight of the school bag, is distributed through out the 
area of contact. It is the distributed force, that is felt by the shoulder. 
When the strap of the bag is broad, the force is distributed over a large area. Hence, 
the pressure felt by the shoulder is less. In these instances, it is useful to know the 
force exerted over a unit area. 

The force exerted over a unit area is known as the pressure.

5.2      Factors affecting the pressure

Let us do activity 5.1 to study the factors affecting the pressure.

Activity 5.1

You will need :-   several  cakes  of  soap,  thin  metal  wire,  several  bags  of  sand 
with the weight of 10 N each, a piece of plank which is longer 
than the length of the cake of soap and similar in breadth of the 
same, a stop watch

Method :- 
 ² Place the cake of soap on 
the  plank  which  is  kept 
on two tables as shown in 
the figure 5.3.

Cake of 
soap

Plank

Table

Table

Wire

 ² Hang one sand bag on the 
wire which is sent round 
the cake of soap. Observe 
what happens.
Increase the number of sand bags one by one using a new cake of soap in each 
instance. Measure the time taken to pass the metal wire through each cake of soap.

Sand 
bag

Figure 5.3

 ²

 ² Tabulate your readings as shown below.
Table 5.1

Instance

 No. of sand bags 
hung

Weight of sand 
bags (N)

Time taken to cut through 
the cake of soap (s)

01

02

10

20

-

01

02

03
04

In the activity 5.1, sometimes one sand bag will not be enough for the wire to cut 
through the cake of soap. If it is so, the reason is that the force exerted by the weight 
of one sand bag is not enough to cut the cake of soap. When the number of sand 
bags are being increased, time taken for the wire to cut through the cake of soap 
becomes less.  

Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

61

Two facts are revealed by this activity. They are;

 ▪ Force affects the pressure exerted on a solid object.
 ▪ Pressure increases with the increase of force.

These facts are confirmed by the activity 5.2.

Activity 5.2

You will need :- 
a piece of plank with the size of 15 cm × 10 cm × 1 cm, 
a piece of plank with the size of  20 cm × 15 cm × 1 cm,
a wooden block with the size of 15 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm,
a piece of sponge with the size of 15 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm, 
four 1” nails, a ruler of 15cm or a scale, weight of 2 kg, 
weight of 5 kg, a hammer, a Newton spring balance

Method :-
 ² Fix the planks of the sizes 20 cm × 15 cm × 1 cm and 
15 cm × 10 cm × 1 cm as shown in the figure 5.4 a, 
with nails. Paste the scale of 15 cm along the 20 cm 
long vertical side of the plank. 

 ² Place the piece of sponge on the horizontal plank as 

shown in the figure 5.4 b.

 ² Note down the reading of the scale, which is relevant 
to the upper horizontal edge of the piece of sponge. 

15 c m

20 cm

15

10

5

0

15

10

5

0

15 cm

10 cm
Figure 5.4 a

Piece of sponge

Figure 5.4 b

 ² Weigh the wooden block of 15 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm using the Newton spring 

balance.

 ² Now, place this wooden block on the piece of sponge, 
as shown in figure 5.4 c. Note down the new reading of 
scale at the upper edge of the piece of sponge.

Weight of 2 kg

 ² Then place the weight of   
   2 kg on the wooden block 
  as shown in figure 5.4 d and  
take the reading of the upper  

15

10

5

0

Wooden Block

Figure 5.4 c

  edge of the piece of sponge as before.
 ² Next, remove the weight of 2 kg and place the weight  
  of 5 kg on the wooden block and take the reading. 
 ² Tabulate the readings, you obtained as below in the 

           table 5.2.

Figure 5.4 d

15

10

5

0

62 Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

 
Table 5.2

Instance

Force  exerted  on 
the piece of sponge 
(N)

Reading at the upper 
edge  of  the  piece  of 
sponge (cm)

Reduction of the 
height of sponge 
(cm)

Sponge only

Wooden  block  on 
the sponge
Wooden block and 
weight  of  2  kg  on 
the sponge
Wooden block and 
weight  of  5  kg  on 
the sponge

In every instance of the above activity, the area of the wooden block, in contact 
with the piece of sponge is the same. The force exerted on the piece of sponge is 
increased gradually. Accordingly, the contraction of the sponge is also increased. 
Thus,  it  is  clear  that  the  pressure  on  the  piece  of  sponge  is  increased  gradually. 
Therefore, it can be concluded that the pressure increases with the increase of force.

Activity 5.3

You will need :- a cake of soap, a piece of thin wire with the diameter of 0.2 mm, 
a piece of thick wire with the diameter of 1.5 mm, a sand bag 
of  the  weight  of  20N,  a  piece  of  plank  which  is  similar  in 
breadth to the cake of soap

Method :- 
 ² Place  the  piece  of  plank 
between  two  table-tops 
and keep the cake of soap 
on the plank as shown in 
the figure 5.5.

Cake of 
soap

Plank

Table

 ² Send 

the 

thick  wire 
round  the  cake  of  soap 
and  hang  the  sand  bag 
of  20  N  weight.  Observe 
what happens.

Table

Wire

Sand 
bag

Figure 5.5

 ² Remove the thick wire and repeat the above step using the thin wire. Observe 

what happens again. 

 ² What can be concluded according to the observations you made?

Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

63

In the activity 5.3 above, same weight is used in both instances; with the thick wire 
as well as with the thin wire. Hence, the force exerted on the cake of soap is same 
in both instances. But, the cake of soap is cut through easily when the thin wire is 
used. The reason for this is that, the force acted on unit area of the cake of soap is 
greater when the thin wire is used. That means, the pressure is greater when thin 
wire is used, than when the thick wire is used. Cutting through the cake of soap is 
easier when more pressure is exerted.

The manner the pressure changes according to the area on which force is acted, can 
be understood further by doing the activity 5.4.

Activity 5.4

You will need :- 
a piece of plank with the size of 15 cm × 10 cm × 1 cm, 
a piece of plank with the size of 20 cm × 15 cm × 1 cm,
a wooden block (A) with the size of 15 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm,
a piece of sponge (B) with the size of 15 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm,
a piece of sponge (C) with the size of 15 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm, 
a piece of sponge (D) with the size of 10 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm, 
four 1” nails, a scale of 15 cm, a hammer, a Newton spring balance

10

15

0

5

Figure 5.6 a

10 cm

15 cm

5 cm

Method :- 

 ² Weigh the wooden block using the spring balance.
 ² Paste the scale of 15 cm on to the L shaped frame made 

as in the activity 5.2.

 ² Now place the sponge  B on the plank. Note down the 
reading  of  the  scale  relevant  to  the  upper  horizontal 
edge of the sponge.

 ² Then place the 15 cm × 10 cm surface of the wooden 

block on the sponge as shown in figure 5.6 a.

15 cm

5 cm

10 cm

15

10

5

0

Figure 5.6 b

 ² Note down the new reading of the scale relevant to the upper horizontal 

edge of the sponge.

 ² Now remove the sponge B and place the sponge C on the plank as shown 
in figure 5.6 b (place the 15 cm × 5 cm surface horizontally). Note down 
the reading of the scale relevant to the upper horizontal edge of the sponge.
 ² Then place the 15 cm × 5 cm surface of the wooden block on the sponge. 
Note down the reading of the scale relevant to the upper horizontal edge of 
the sponge.

64 Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

 ² Now remove the sponge C and place the sponge D on the plank (place the 
10 cm × 5 cm surface horizontally). Note down the reading relevant to the 
upper horizontal edge.

 ² Then  place  the  10  cm  ×  5  cm  surface  of  the  wooden  block  on  the 
10 cm × 5 cm surface of the sponge. Now take the reading of the upper 
edge of the sponge.

 ² Tabulate your readings as below.

Instance 

Force exerted 
on the surface 
(N)

Table 5.3

Contact surface 
area (cm2)

Height of 
the sponge 
(cm)

Reduction of 
the height of 
sponge (cm)

Sponge B only

When wooden 
block contacts 
its 15 cm × 10 
cm surface
Sponge C only

When wooden 
block contacts 
its 15 cm × 5 cm 
surface
Sponge D only

When wooden 
block contacts 
its 10 cm × 5 cm 
surface

 ² What is the conclusion that can be made according to the observations?

During this activity, same wooden block is kept on all sponges. Therefore, the force 
exerted on all different sponges is the same. But, the contact area of the wooden 
block on each piece of sponge is changed. 

Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

65

When the contact area is large, the contraction of the sponge is less and when that 
area is less, the contraction of sponge is higher. 

The standard unit of measuring pressure is N m-2. It is also known as Pascal (Pa). 

In honour of the French mathematician Blaise Pascal, unit of pressure was named 

Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  the  pressure  is  less,  when  the  contact  area  is  high  and 
vice-versa. 

Accordingly, it can be concluded as follows. 

 ² The pressure exerted by a solid object on a solid surface depends on the surface 

area on which the force is acting.

 ² Higher the surface area on which the force is acting, pressure become low.
 ² Lower the surface area on which the force is acting, pressure become high.

According to the above activities it is confirmed that the pressure exerted by a solid 
object on a solid surface depends on two factors. They are; 

1.  Perpendicular force acting on the surface

2.  Surface area on which the force is acting

Pressure  is  defined  as  the  perpendicular  force  acting  normally  on  an  unit  area. 
Pressure exerted by  a solid object on a solid surface can be calculated according to 
the following formula.

Pressure (P) =

Perpendicular force (F)
Surface area on which the force is acting (A)

5.3    Units of pressure

Units of pressure can be deduced by using the above relationship of pressure. The 
standard unit of measuring force is N (Newton) and the standard unit of measuring 
surface area is m2 (square metre).

Pressure

Pressure

 =

               Perpendicular force     
Surface area on which the force is acting

=   N  
  m2

= N m-2  (Newton per square meter)

66 Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

after him.

1 N m-2 = 1 Pa

Let us pay our attention to the solved problems on pressure. 

Solved 

example 1:

What is the pressure exerted on a surface of 2 m2, when a  

normal force of 300 N is acting on it?

Pressure

Perpendicular force

Surface area on which the force is acting

=

=

=

300 N

   2 m2

150 N m-2 or 150 Pa

Solved 

example 2:

Weight of a cubic box is 400 N. 

It  is  kept  on  a  horizontal  plane 

surface.  Pressure  exerted  by  the 

box  on  the  surface  is  200  Pa. 

What is the contact area of the surface of the box?

Pressure

=

Surface area =

Surface area =

 Perpendicular force

     Surface area

 Perpendicular force

         Pressure

  400 N     

  200 N m-2

Surface area =

  2 m2

5.4     Changing the factors affecting pressure as needed

When cutting something it is easier if the knife is  well 

sharpened. When sharpening, the knife-edge becomes 

very thin. It can exert a high pressure on the object. So, 

the object can be cut thinner and easier (figure 5.7).

Figure 5.7

 
The standard unit of measuring pressure is N m-2. It is also known as Pascal (Pa). 
In honour of the French mathematician Blaise Pascal, unit of pressure was named 
after him.

1 N m-2 = 1 Pa

Let us pay our attention to the solved problems on pressure. 

Solved 
example 1:

What is the pressure exerted on a surface of 2 m2, when a  
normal force of 300 N is acting on it?

Pressure

=

=

=

Perpendicular force
Surface area on which the force is acting
300 N
   2 m2
150 N m-2 or 150 Pa

Solved 
example 2:

Weight of a cubic box is 400 N. 
It  is  kept  on  a  horizontal  plane 
surface.  Pressure  exerted  by  the 
box  on  the  surface  is  200  Pa. 
What is the contact area of the surface of the box?

Pressure

=

Surface area =

Surface area =

Surface area =

 Perpendicular force
     Surface area
 Perpendicular force
         Pressure

  400 N     
  200 N m-2
  2 m2

5.4     Changing the factors affecting pressure as needed

When cutting something it is easier if the knife is  well 
sharpened. When sharpening, the knife-edge becomes 
very thin. It can exert a high pressure on the object. So, 
the object can be cut thinner and easier (figure 5.7).

Figure 5.7

Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

67

 
The bottom of the skates used by skiers is made 
sharp  like  a  knife-edge  (figure  5.8).  Because  of 
this, a high pressure is exerted on ice, when the 
skier is skating. That high pressure makes the ice 
liquify and form a slippery surface.

Roads  can  be  easily  damaged  because  of  the 
high  pressure  exerted  by  heavily  loaded  trucks 
and  container  carriers.  To  avoid  this,  such 
vehicles are made with a large number of wheels 
(figure  5.9).  Then,  the  contact  area  with  the 
road is increased and the pressure is decreased. 
Hence, the damages to the roads are minimized.

Figure 5.8

Figure 5.9

Assignment 5.1

In our day-to-day activities, we have to increase or decrease pressure. One way 
of doing this is the change of surface area. List such instances and explain them 
scientifically. 

Summary  

 ² Pressure is defined as the perpendicular force acting on an unit area.
 ² The  pressure  exerted  by  a  solid  object  on  a  solid  surface  depends  on  two 

factors. They are,

•  Perpendicular force acting on the surface
•  Surface area on which the force is acting 

 ²

Pressure (P) =

 Perpendicular force (F)
 Surface area (A)

 ² The unit of measuring pressure is N m-2 / N/m2 or Pascal (Pa).
 ² Pressure  can  be  increased  or  decreased  by  manipulating  the  factors  which 

affect on pressure. 

68 Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

       
Exercise

01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.

1.  What is the unit of measuring pressure?

1. N m2 

2.  N m 

3. N m-1 

4. N m-2

2. What is the unit of measuring pressure, that indicates a specific name?

1.Newton 

2. Joule 

3. Pascal 

4. Watt

3. Consider the following statements of pressure.

a. Pressure is equal to the ratio,  

 Perpendicular force 
Surface area 

b. Pressure increases when perpendicular force is increased.

c. Pressure increases when surface area is increased.

Which of the above statements are true?

1. a and b only 
3. b and c only 

 2. a and c only 
 4. a, b and c all 

4. A perpendicular force of 60 N was applied on an area of 3 m2. What is the 

pressure exerted on the surface?

             1' 

1
60 N « 3 m2

    2'  3 m2
60 N 

     3'  60 N
3 m2

   4' 60 N « 3 m2

5. The pressure was 50 Pa, when a perpendicular force was applied on a surface 

area of 2.5 m2. The force applied was;

       1'  1
25

 N            2'  1
20

N     3' 20 N  

4' 125 N 

Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

69

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
06. In which of these instances, the devices are applied to decrease pressure?

1

3

2

4

02) Answer the following questions.

1. (a) What are the units of pressure?

    (b) Mention the factors affecting pressure.

    (c) Write down a relationship for pressure in terms of those factors.

2. (a) Write two examples where the factor, area is practically used to increase

pressure.

(b) Mention two examples where the factor, area is practically used to  

decrease pressure.

(c) State two examples where the factor, perpendicular force is practically 

used to increase pressure.

   1 m

03) The length, breadth and height of the    
cuboid  shown  in  the  figure  are  2 m, 
1 m and 1 m respectively. Its weight is 
400 N.
(a)  The  cuboid  is  kept  on  a  horizontal 
surface as shown in the figure. How 
much is the pressure acting on the surface?

 1 m

B

A

C

2 m

(b) While the cuboid is in the position as in part (a), an object weighing 150 N 
is kept on it. Then, what is the pressure acting on the horizontal surface?            

(c) The object weighing 150 N is removed and the cuboid is kept  

to contact  its  surface  B  with  the  horizontal  surface.  Then,  what  is  the 
pressure exerted on the horizontal surface?

70 Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

 
04) (a)  The  figure  shows  a  machine  used  in  the
construction  of roads. Clarify how the factors 
affecting pressure are changed, to  change  the 
pressure exerted by this  machine on the road.

(b)   Living being show various natural adaptations 
to increase pressure. Give 2 examples for such 
instances.

(c)   Living  being  show  various  natural  adaptations  to  decrease  pressure. 

Give 2 examples for such instances.

Technical Terms

Pressure 
Perpendicular force
Surface area 

Pascal

-  A•UP®
-  ö\[Szx Âø\

-  mSvkh 
-  wNs,ïn n,h
-  mDIaG j¾.M,h -  ÷©Ø£μ¨¤ß £μ¨£ÍÄ
-  meial,a 

-  £ìPõÀ

Science | Pressure Exerted  by Solid

71

 
 ² The heart has four chambers. The upper chambers are called atria and the lower 

chambers are called ventricles. 
³  Left atrium 
³  Left ventricle   

³  Right atrium
³  Right ventricle

 ² There are two valves between the atria and ventricles.

³  Bicuspid valve is in between the left atrium and left ventricle.
³  Tricuspid valve is in between the right atrium and right ventricle.

 ² There are two main arteries connected to the ventricles.

³   Aorta starts from the left ventricle.
³   Pulmonary artery starts from the right ventricle.

 ² There are semi lunar valves at the starting points of the main arteries.

³   Aortic semi lunar valve is at the starting point of the aorta.
³   Pulmonary semi lunar valve is at the starting point of the pulmonary artery.

 ² Main veins are connected to the atria.

³  The superior vena cava and inferior vena cava open to the right atrium.  
³  Left and right pulmonary veins open to the left artrium.

Assignment 6.1

 ² Construct a model of the heart to show the structure of the heart.

6.2     Arteries, veins and capillaries

The blood vessels that take blood away from the heart are known as arteries while, 
the vessels that take the blood towards the heart are known as veins. Main arteries 
starting from the heart divide into branches.

 ² The  pulmonary  artery  which  starts  from  the  heart  transport  blood  to  lungs. 
Aorta  supply  blood  to  the  other  organs.  Within  an  organ  an  artery  further 
divides into arterioles and then into capillaries.

 ² The capillaries join together to form venules and venules join together to form 

veins.

 ² Pulmonary veins starting from the lungs take the blood to left atrium. 

 ² Veins from the organs above the heart join the superior vena cava and veins 
from the organs below the heart join the inferior vena cava. Both the superior 
and inferior vena cava open into the right atrium. 

Science | The Human Circulatory System 73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3    Components of blood and their functions

Although  you  see  blood  as  a  red  fluid,  only  55%  of  its  value  is  in  liquid  form. 
This liquid part is called as the plasma. The other  45% of its volume consists of 
corpuscles which is in solid form. 

Blood

Corpuscles

Plasma

Red blood 
cells

White blood 
cells

Platelets

Water

Things 
soluble in 
water

Things 
insoluble in 
water

Figure 6.5 

A microscopic observation of a blood sample shows three types of corpuscles.

 y Red blood cells/ erythrocytes
 y White blood cells/ leukocytes
 y Platelets 

Erythrocytes and leukocytes are cells while the platelets are cell fragments.

Functions of blood

Red blood cells/ erythrocytes 

Red blood cells contain a red pigment which is called haemoglobin. Haemoglobin 
carries oxygen from lungs to the body cells and also gives blood its red colour.  

White blood cells/ leukocytes

White  blood  cells  defend  the  body  by  destroying  pathogens  and  producing 
antibodies.  White  blood  cells  are  categorized  into  neutrophils,  eosinophils, 
basophils, lymphocytes and monocytes.

Platelets

Platelets help in the clotting process of blood at a bleeding site. Some virus infections 
cause a rapid decline in a platelet percentage. e.g. Dengue, Leptospirosis

Plasma 

The main function of the plasma is transporting substances dissolved in it. 

Science | The Human Circulatory System 75

Some examples are given below;
 ²
 ²

It transports the digestive products, minerals and vitamins to the cells. 

It transports the excretory products during biochemical reactions within 
the cells to the excretory organs. 

 ² Plasma transports hormones, proteins, enzymes and gases to the relevant 

parts of the body.

6.4    Blood transfusion

The transfer of blood from one individual to another is known as blood transfusion. 
The person who donates blood is called the donor and the person who receives is 
called the recipient. However, blood transfusion is not possible between any two 
individuals.

For a transfusion to take place, compatibility
of  the  blood  group  and  the  Rhesus  factor 
between  the  donor  and  the  recipient  is 
compulsory. 

Compatibility of the blood group 

There  are  four  blood  groups  as  A,  B,  AB 
and O depending on the protein components 
present in blood cells. 
Compatibility  of  blood  groups  in  transfusion  is  represented  in  the  table  6.1. 
(√  represent  positive  compatibility  of  blood  group  while  «  represent  lack  of 
compatibility of blood group) 

Figure 6.6

Table 6.1- Compatibility of blood group

D
o
n
o
r

Blood type
A

B

AB

O

A
√

«
«
√

Recipient
B
«
√

«
√

AB
√
√
√
√

O
«
«
«
√

According  to  the  table,  blood  group AB  can  receive  blood  from  all  other  blood 
groups. Therefore, blood group AB is called the universal recipient.

Blood group O can donate to all the other blood groups. Therefore, blood group O 
is called the universal donor. 

76

Science | The Human Circulatory System

 
Information in the table 6.1 can be illustrated as in figure 6.7.

Donor

A

B

AB

O

Recipient

A

AB

B

AB

AB

A

B

AB

O

Figure 6.7 - Compatibility of blood group

For a blood transfusion, not only the blood group, but also the Rhesus factor (Rh 
factor) must be compatible. 

Compatibility of Rhesus factor

If the Rhesus factor is present in one’s blood it is considered as Rh+ and if Rhesus 
factor is absent, it is considered as Rh-. The recipients who are Rh+ can receive both 
Rh+ and Rh- blood. However, the Rh- recipients can receive Rh- blood only. The 
table 6.2 shows the compatibility of blood with Rhesus factor.
(√ represent positive compatibility of blood with Rhesus factor while « represent 
negative compatibility of blood with Rhesus factor

Table 6.2 - Compatibility of  Rhesus factor

D
o
n
o
r

Rh+

Rh-

Recipient
Rh+
√

√

Rh-

«
√

The figure 6.8 represents the same facts in table 6.2.

Rh-

Rh+

Hence both the blood group and the Rhesus factor 
have to be matched to donate blood. Both the blood 
group  and  Rhesus  factor  are  considered  when 
expressing the blood group of an individual.  

e.g.   A+, A-, B+, B-, AB+, AB-, O+, O - 

Rh-

Rh+

Rh+

Figure 6.8 - Compatibility of

Rhesus factor

The  National  Blood Transfer  Service  (NBTS)  has  a  list  of  other  qualifications  a 
donor must fulfill. A donor has to complete the Blood Donor Declaration correctly 
and hand it over to the NBTS before donating blood. Blood donor declaration and 
donation record is given in the extra knowledge frame. 

Science | The Human Circulatory System 77

 
For extra knowledge 

78

Science | The Human Circulatory System

MEDICAL ASSESSMENT

REGISTRATION

BLOOD COLLECTION

Blood agglutination

Clumping of  the  transfused  blood  particles in  the  body  of  the  recipient is  called 
agglutination. 

This happens when the blood groups of donor and recipient are incompatible.

Blood clotting/ coagulation is an important process that prevents excessive bleeding 
when there is an injury or internal bleeding. This coagulation mechanism differs 
from the coagulation mechanism of agglutination. 

When  there  is  an  injury  or  bleeding,  the  platelets  at  the  damaged  blood  vessels 
breakdown and the resulting chemical process forms a blood clot to stop bleeding.

Maintaining  a  proper  functioning  of  the  blood  circulatory  system  is  vital  for  a 
healthy life of a person. 

Science | The Human Circulatory System 79

Some favourable habits to maintain healthy blood circulation system

 ² Maintain mentally less stressful lifestyle
 ² Engage in physical exercises daily
 ² Maintain the correct Body Mass Index (BMI) value according to height and 

weight, with a healthy diet.

 ² Reduce salt consumption
 ² Control conditions like high blood pressure and diabetes
 ² Add more vegetables and fruits to meals
 ² Reduce consumption of fatty foods
 ² Refrain from smoking and liquor
 ² Have more concern if there is a family history of heart attacks, high blood 

pressure and diabetes

Assignment 6.3

 ² Collect newspaper cuttings about the good health habits that should be 

followed to maintain a healthy blood circulatory system.

 ²

Share that knowledge with your classmates.

Summary 

 ² The human heart has four chambers.
 ² The  upper  chambers  are  the  right  atrium  and  left  atrium  and  the  lower 

chambers are the right ventricle and left ventricle.

 ² Aorta is connected to the left ventricle while pulmonary artery is connected 

to the right ventricle.

 ² Left and right pulmonary veins are connected to the left atrium while superior 

vena cava and inferior vena cava are connected to the right atrium.

 ² Semi lunar valves are at the beginning of main arteries.
 ² Bicuspid valve is between the left ventricle and left atrium.
 ² Tricuspid valve is between the right atrium and right ventricle.
 ² The blood vessels that take the blood away from the heart are arteries and 

the vessels that take the blood towards the heart are veins. 

 ² An artery ends up with a capillary and a vein starts with a capillary.
 ² The main functions of blood are transportation and protection.

80

Science | The Human Circulatory System

 ² Depending  on  the  protein  components  in  blood  cells,  there  are  four  blood 

groups as A, B, AB and O.

 ² Compatibility of the blood group and the Rhesus factor between the donor 

and the recipient is important for blood transfusion.
 ² AB  is the universal recipient and O is the universal donor.
 ² Clumping  of  the  transfused  blood  particles  in  the  body  of  the  recipient  is 

known as blood agglutination.

 ² The  mechanism  of  blood  coagulation  during  an  injury  differs  from  the 

mechanism of blood coagulation in the process of agglutination.

 ² There is a list of qualifications a blood donor must fulfill.
 ²

It is vital to maintain a proper functioning blood circulatory system as to lead 
a healthy life.

Exercise

01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.  

1.  Aorta starts from,
1. left ventricle  
3. left atrium 

               2. right ventricle
              4. right atrium

      2.  What  are  the  blood  types  that  can  be  transfused  to  a  person  with  the 

blood group B
1.   A and B

2.  A and O

3. O and B

4. A and AB

 3. The universal donor and the universal recipient are,
2.  A and B

3. O and AB

1.  A and O

4. AB and O

 4. Following are some ideas given by a student about blood transfusion.

a. Compatibility of blood group is compulsory.
b. Rh- blood can be transfused to a person with Rh+.
c. Only Rh- blood can be transfused to a person with Rh-.
The correct statements are,
1. a and b only
3. a and c only

2. b and c only
4. a, b and c all

5. During an internal bleeding the blood cells that help for blood coagulation 

are,
1. Red blood cells    
3. Platelets 

2. White blood cells
4. Plasma

Science | The Human Circulatory System 81

 
  
 
6. Followings are some ideas given by a student about the functions of blood.

a.  Carries oxygen to the body cells
b.  Kill pathogenic micro-organisms
c.  Agglutination occurs when transferring blood

1. a and b only
3. a and c only

2. b and c only
4. a, b and c all

02) Give short answers.

1.  Use  only  the  numbers  in  the  figure 
when you answer the given questions 
related to the human heart.

a.  What are the two veins that open 

to the right atrium?  

b.  Write  the  numbers  of  bicuspid 

8

1

4

3
2

6

9

valve and tricuspid valve.

c.  Write  down  the  names  of  the 
four  chambers  and  the  relevant 
numbers

11
13

2.  Write  five  good  habits  that  help  in 
maintaining  a  healthy  circulatory 
system.

Technical Terms

5

7

10

12

14

Blood circulatory system - 
- 
Blood groups
Blood transfusion
Universal donor
Universal recipient
Rhesus factor
Agglutination

- 

-

-

reêr ixirK moaO;sh -  S¸va _Ø÷Óõmhz öuõSv
reêr .K
reêr mdrú,hkh
id¾j odhlhd
id¾j m%;s.%dylhd
Íiia idOlh

-  S¸v ÁøPPÒ
-  S¸vU SÖUS¨ £õ´a\À
-

\µ“Á ÁÇ[Q
\µ“Á Áõ[Q
Ÿéì Põµo
- 
-  J¸[öPõmhÀ

-

- 
-  Yaf,aIKh

82

Science | The Human Circulatory System

7 Plant  Growth 

Substances

7.1   Introduction to plant growth substances

You  know  that  air,  water,  light  and  minerals 
are  essential  for  plant  growth.  It  has  been 
discovered that some chemical substances also 
affect towards the plant growth. 

Have  you  ever  thought  how  does  a  stem  of 
a  plant  grows  upwards  and  its  roots  grow 
downwards  after 
the  seed  germination? 
Observe the figures 7.1 a and 7.1 b .

Have you ever thought how does a stem of a 
plant grows upwards and its roots grow downwards even the plant pot falls down? 
Let us do the activity 7.1 to study about it.

Figure 7.1 a

Figure 7.1 b

Activity 7.1

You will need :-  Two similar potted plants  

Method:-  
 y Cut and remove the apex of one plant. Then,  

measure the heights of both plants.

 y Supply same environmental conditions for both 
       plants and measure their heights daily for a week.

Figure 7.2

You will observe that the plant with the apex grows and its height increases while 
the height of the plant without the apex does not change. So, we can guess that there 
is an effect of the apex on plants to increase their height. Let us do the activity 7.2 
to find out more about it.

Activity 7.2

You will need :- Two similar potted plants, a box covered with a black paper 

Method:- 
 y Cut and remove the apex of one plant.
 y Place the two plants inside the box in a way that both plants get light only 

from one direction.

 Science | Plant Growth Substances 83

 
 
 
Auxins, produced in the apex diffuse downwards. It speeds up the growth of new 
cells and the shoot of the plant grows upwards. IAA (Indole Acetic Acid) is a natural 
growth substance found in plants.
Auxin concentrate more in the side of plant where intensity of light fall is low and 
auxin concentrate less in the other side of the plant. Auxin move to the darker side 
of the plant, causing the cells there to grow longer than corresponding cells on the 
other side of the plant. This causes a curving 
of the plant stem tip towards the light. This 
is known as positive phototropic movement. 
Auxin also inhibit the growth of lateral buds 
(figure 7.5).

Pruning  of  plant  apex  is  practised  in 
horticuture to maintain bushy plants.

Gibberellins 

Figure 7.5 - Growth of lateral buds in 
Pomegranate plant

Gibberellin promotes mainly the elongation
of the stem and growth of the fruits.

Cytokinins

Cytokinin accelerates the cell division. So, 
the  growth  of  flowers,  leaves,  fruits  and 
roots get accelerated.  They stimulate seed 
germination and delay plant ageing.

Figure 7.6 - Growth of 
Cabbage plant due to 
gibberellin

For extra knowledge

Figure  7.7 - 
Increasing the rate 
of rooting in plants 
using Cytokinin

Abscisic acid is a plant growth substance. It is a chemical substance that cause 
closing  of  stomata  when  the  plant  experiences  shortage  of  water.  Thus,  it 
decreases transpiration. 

Ethene is a simple organic compound which produces in low amounts in plants. 
It is necessary for ripening of fruits. In ripening, starch stored in plants converted 
to sugar. If a plant is damaged, ethene released to the wound area and a new 
tissue forms to recover the wound.   

 Science | Plant Growth Substances 85

       
 
What is the reason for falling leaves and fruits when matured?

When you observe a stalk of a naturally fallen leaf and a stalk of a broken leaf, 
it would be clear to you that, the naturally fallen leaf stalk has a clear abscission 
layer. The  reason  for  making  an  abscission  layer  is,  the  reduction  results  in  the 
amount of growth substances in fruits and leaves with their maturity. As a result, 
fruit fall and leaf fall take place in plants. 

7.2   Uses of artificial growth substances

Artificial growth substances are widely used in horticulture and growing ornamental 
plants. Some of these are given in the table 7.1.

Artificial growth substances

Uses

Table 7.1

2,4 DPA
(2,4 Dichloro Phenoxyacetic Acid)

2,4,5 TPA
(2,4,5 Trichloro Phenoxyacetic Acid) 

(IAA) Indole Acetic Acid

(IBA) Indole Butyric Acid

(NAA) Naphthalene Acetic Acid

As a broad leaf weedicide for paddy fields

To induce root formation of stem cuttings, 
To grow fruits quickly

To prevent pre-mature fruit drop, To induce 
flowering in pine apple in off-seasons

Cytocell

To get mango fruits in the off-season

 Assignment 7.1

 ² Collect information about the instances that artificial growth substances are 

used.

 ² If possible arrange a visit to a plant nursery where artificial growth substances 

are used.

 ² Collect information about the use of artificial growth substances and prepare 

a report.

86

 Science | Plant Growth Substances

  
Assignment 7.2

Prepare  a  collection  of  flower  plants  by  the  root  induction  of  their  stem 
cuttings using artificial growth substances. Plant them to beautify your school 
environment.

Summary

 ² The organic substances that influence some physiological processes during 

the growth of a plant are known as growth substances.

 ² Some growth substances promote the growth while some inhibit the growth 

of plants.

 ² Auxin, Gibberellin and Cytokinin are some examples for growth promoting 

substances.

 ² Artificial growth substances and inhibitors are used for agricultural purposes.

Exercise
01)  Select the correct or most suitable answer.
1.  The figure shows the growth of a plant close to a window. 
What can be there in the side to which its apex has grown?
 1. light 
 3. soil             4. air

2. water

2.  An artificial growth substance that is used to encourage root 

formation of a stem cutting is,

1. Indole Acetic Acid 
2. 2, 4 Dichloro Phenoxyacetic Acid 
3. Naphthalene Acetic Acid 
4. 2, 4, 5 Trichloro Phenoxyacetic Acid  

3.  Select the incorrect statement regarding growth substances.

1.  organic substances which control physiological activities in plants 
2.  growth substances can be artificially synthesized for use 
3.  some are used for inducing fruit formation
4.  stimulate the growth only

 Science | Plant Growth Substances 87

 
 
  
 4. Three artificially synthesized growth substances are given below.

a. Indole Acetic Acid
b. Indole Butyric Acid
c. Napthalene Acetic Acid

 Which of these are useful in initiating roots ?

  1.  a and b only 
  3.  b and c only 

  2. a and c only
  4. a, b and c all

    5. What is the artificial substance used to prevent pre-mature fruit drop and to 

induce flowering in pine apple in off seasons?

1.  2,4 DPA  

2. IAA 

3. IBA 

4.  NAA

02)   Chemical substances and their effect for plant growth is mentioned in 

A and B colomns. Match A and B correctly.

A

a. Auxins
b. Cytokinins
b. Gibberellins

B
cell division
cell elongation
stem elongation

03)   State  three  instances  where  artificial  growth  substances  are  used  in 

agriculture. Give one example for each.

Technical Terms

Plant growth substances

Growth promoters
Growth inhibitors
Seed germination
Plant ageing
Phototropic movements

uõÁμ ÁÍºa]a^μõUQ¨ 
£uõºzu[PÒ

-

- Ydl j¾Ol øjH
- j¾Okh W;af;ackh lrk øjH - ÁÍºa] ysiPÒ
- j¾Okh ksfYaOkh lrk øjH - ÁÍºa] {÷μõvPÒ
- îc m%frdayKh
- Ydl úhm;a ùu
- m%Ndj¾;S p,k
- Ydl l|kaj, Èla ùu

- Âzx •øÍzuÀ
- uõÁμ[PÒ Á¯uõuÀ
- JÎzv¸¨£Áø\Ä
- usk }m]¯øhuÀ
ö\¯ØøP ÁÍºa]¨ 
£uõºzu[PÒ

-

Stem elongation
Artificial growth substances - lD;%su j¾Ol øjH

88

 Science | Plant Growth Substances

  
  
 
Elastic band A represents the biceps muscle in the elbow joint. When biceps muscle 
is contracted the hands bends and lifts up.
Elastic band B represents the triceps muscle in the elbow joint. When triceps muscle 
is contracted the hand is stretched. Then, the biceps muscle comes to its original 
resting position.

8.3   Support and movements of plants

Support of plants

Just like in animals, tissues are present within plants for the purpose of mechanical 
support. Figure 8.5 shows the garden Balsam plant. You may have noticed on sunny 
days these plants get withered and the stem is bent down. This is due to lack of 
water supply to the plant.
To keep non-woody plants erect and alive it is vital to have water inside the plant, 
where as woody plants can be kept erect in low water percentages due to presence 
of various chemical substances such as cellulose, lignin deposited in the walls in 
heartwood of the plant. They give rigidity to the plant (figure 8.6).

Figure 8.5 - Non-woody plant (Balsam)

Figure 8.6 -  Woody plant (Mango)

Movements of plants
Growth of a part in a plant as a response to a stimulus or change of the location due 
to a turgor change , is known as a movement of a plant. These responses can be 
catogorized into two main groups as,

 ²
Tropic movements
 ² Nastic movements

Tropic movements

Tropic movements are growth or movements that occur due to a direct influence 
between  the  direction  of  stimulus  and  direction  of  response.  Tropic  movements 
occur due to the effect of growth substances. Response may be towards or away 
from the stimulus. Positive tropism occurs towards the stimulus. Negative tropism 
occurs away from the stimulus.

92

Science | Support and Movements of Organisms

Some of tropic movements are described below.

 y Positive geotropism 
 y Negative geotropism 
 y Positive phototropism 
 y Positive hydrotropism 
 y Positive chemotropism  - growth of the pollen along the tube towards 

roots growing towards the ground
stem of the plant growing away from the ground
stem growing towards the light
roots moving towards the water source

-
-
-
-

 y Positive thigmotropism 

-

the ovule
coiling  of  tendrils  in  Passion  fruit  with  the 
support

Let us do activity 8.3 to study about tropic movements. 

Activity 8.3

You will need:- Two pots, s ome green    
                          gram seeds
Method :- 
 y
Plant 5 soaked seeds in each pot.
 y After  seed  germination,  keep  one 
healthy plant in each pot and uproot 
all the other plants.

 y Keep one pot vertical and the other 
toppled down as in the figure 8.7.

Figure 8.7

 y Observe the growth pattern of root and shoot after one week.
 y

Identify and study tropic movements.

In both pots, roots grow towards ground.
That means movement of a plant root is 
positive  geotropic,  and  movement  of  a 
plant shoot is negative geotropic (figure 
8.8), as it move.

Figure 8.8

Science | Support and Movements of Organisms 93

 
Nastic movements
In nastic movements, response of the direction 
does  not  depend  on  the  direction  of  stimulus 
(The direction of these movements are specific). 
Response is always towards a specific direction; 
irrespective of  the direction of stimulus. This 
reaction is not related with growth substances 
triggered by external stimulus. Most of them are 
movements  due  to  turgor  change.  In  legume 
plants, a structure called pulvinus is located as a 
swelling at the base of the petiole or leaflet. It 
contains  parenchyma  cells,  which  move 
according to the changes in turgor pressure.
Some of nastic movements are as follows.
 ² Nyctinastic movements - sleeping or shrinking of leaves of 'Kathurumurunga' 
/ 'Agaththi', tamarind, Mimosa and 'Nelli' / 'Nellikkai' leaves when dark falls
 ² Haptonastic  movement  -  sleeping  or  shrinking  of  Mimosa  leaves,  when  the 

Figure 8.9 - Shrinking of Mimosa leaves 

stimulus is touched
Seismonastic movement  - exhibiting sleeping movement during a shock 
Photonastic movement - blooming of flowers with the sunrise 

 ²
 ²

Let us do the activity 8.4 to study about responses of plant parts

Activity 8.4

You will need :- Mimosa plants
Method :- 
 y Touch the leaves of a Mimosa plant.
 y Make a vibration without touching the leaves.
 y Report your observations.
 y Report  if  there  are  any  special  features  in  the  plants  responsible  for  these 

movements.

When you touch a Mimosa plant the leaves show the
sleep movement. It is a haptonastic movement. When 
you create a vibration without touching, the leaves of 
the Mimosa plant show the sleep movement. It is a 
seismonastic movement. 
The pulvinus located at each leaflet and petiole base 
help  for  these  movements  of  the  plant.  Pvlvini  are 
also present in plants showing sleeping movement at 
dust with the decrease of sunlight.
e.g. 'Kathurumurunga', Tamarind, 'Nelli'

94

Science | Support and Movements of Organisms

pulvinus

Figure 8.10 - Place where the 
pulvini are located

 
For extra knowledge

Tactic movements  
In addition to tropic movements and nastic movements there is a type of movement 
known as tactic, which is related with the direction of stimulus. In tactic movement, 
the whole organism responds to the stimulus.
e.g. Small Algal Species like Chlamydomonas

In-situ Conservation
Although plants show movements they cannot locomote like animals. Animals can 
avoid external hazards by locomotion.
Plants  grow  in  a  habitat,  where  all  necessary  external  factors  needed  to  growth 
are present. Hence, plants can get destroyed in its habitat due to external hazards. 
Therefore, it is essential to conserve plants in their own habitat. Conservation of 
an organism, in its living environment is known as in-situ conservation. Strictly 
reserved forests which protect indigenous plants like ebony, satinwood, vitex are 
examples for in-situ conservation. These species of organisms can also be protected 
by conserving sensitive zones of environment. 

Figure 8.11 - 'Vilpattu' reserve

Science | Support and Movements of Organisms 95

Summary

 ² Animals use pseudopodia, cilia, flagella and muscles for their locomotion.
 ² Chordates use bones and muscles connected to the bones for movements.
 ² For a movement to take place, muscles must have the ability to contract,

stretch and recoil to their original resting length after stretched or contracted.

 ² Skeletal system and the muscles give the body a shape and rigidity.
 ² Even though plants do not show locomotion, they show movements.
 ² Movements of plants are categorized as tropic movements and nastic
  movements.
 ² Conservation of an organism in its living environment, is known as in-situ 

conservation.

Exercise
01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.
       1. The appendage used by the snail for its locomotion is, 
2. pseudopodia  
      2. What helps to maintain rigidity of non-woody plants ? 

  1. flagella  

3. cilia   

4. muscular foot

 1. Water 
3.  Different deposited materials 

  2. Air    
  4. Plant nutrients      

     3. Human movements need, 
             1. only the bones.
             2. only the muscles.
             3. both bones and muscles.
             4. none of above.

       4. The leaves of Mimosa plant show sleep movement when touched. This
          movement is known as,
             1. haptonastic movement  
             3. photonastic movement  

 2. nyctinastic movement
 4. positive geotropic movement

       5. The growth of the stem towards the light is a,
             1. positive phototropic movement  
            3. haptonastic movement  

 2. negative geotropic movement
 4. nyctinastic movement 

96

Science | Support and Movements of Organisms

 
 
 
  
 
     
6. A tropic movement is,
  1. a movement with a response directed towards the direction of the stimulus
  2. a movement with a response directed opposite direction of the stimulus
  3. a movement with a response independent of the direction of the stimulus
  4. a movement with a response directed towards or opposite the stimulus 

7. The figure shows the demonstration of,

 1. positive geotropic movement 
  2. positive phototropic movement

 3. hydrotropic movement 
 4. haptonastic movement

02) Following figures show some activities and their observations used to 
demonstrate the plant movements. Write the name of the movement 
demonstrated in each activity.

a. 

Before

After

b. 

c. 

d. 

Technical Terms
Support
Tropic movements
Nastic movements
Tactic movements
In-situ conservation

- uõ[SuÀ
- ikaOdrKh
- v¸¨£ Aø\Ä
- wdj¾;S p,k
- •ßÛø» Aø\Ä
- ikakuk p,k
- Cμ\øn Aø\Ä
- id¾jir p,k
- ia:dkSh ixrlaIKh - EÒ{ø»U Põ¨¦

Science | Support and Movements of Organisms 97

 
 
 
 
9

The Evolutionary
Process

Diversity  of  living  organisms  in  our  environment  is  a  result  of  the  evolutionary 
process. When studying about the evolution it is important to consider about the 
origin of the universe and origin of the life.

In the past, there were many beliefs about the origin of the universe. 

9.1    Origin of the Earth

It is believed that the origin of the Earth took place about 4.5 billion years ago. 

Nebular theory is the first scientific explanation of the origin of the solar system. 
According to this theory, small particles of materials in the universe drew together 
by the force of gravity, clumped up, and the galaxies, the sun and other planets were 
formed. 

Big Bang theory can be considered as the modern theory about the origin of the 
Earth. According to this theory, universe was an energy source with a great energy. 
A giant explosion took place in it and large clouds of dust particles were created. 
These dust particles clumped up together and the galaxies were created. It is said in 
the big bang theory that, our solar system was created in the galaxy known as the 
milky way galaxy.  

Figure 9.1 - Illustration of the Big Bang
Initially the Earth had been a very hot object and its volcanic activities were high. 
The Earth got gradually cooled and less volatile metals with high density formed 
the core of the Earth. It is believed that, Earth's crust was created later, by light 
silicon rocks.

Various types of elements at the centre of the Earth reacted with each other and 

different types of gases were formed. At first the atmosphere of the Earth had gases 

such as Carbon dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4) and Hydrogen sulphide (H2S). The 

absence of Oxygen (O2) in the early atmosphere is a  significant fact.

Initially, the extreme heat of the Earth caused evaporation of water on the planet. 

This evaporated water got condensed and clouds were formed. Water droplets in 

these clouds joined together and dropped onto the Earth as rain. There had been 

continuous heavy rains on the Earth for many years. This rain water which was rich 

with minerals, collected in lower lands and oceans were formed.

Figure 9.2 - Illustrations of primitive Earth

9.2   Origin of life on the Earth 

There are many beliefs and theories on origin of life on the Earth. It is believed that, 

about 3.5 billion years ago life originated on the Earth. 

Let us consider some theories about origin of life on the Earth.

Theory of special creation

According  to  this  theory,  all  living  organisms  on  Earth  were  created  by  a  super 

natural power. Since there is no scientific evidence to prove this theory, scientist do 

This theory states that life was originated from non-living things in a spontaneous 

not pay attention to it. 

Spontaneous generation theory

manner.

e.g. 

 y Rats who born from pieces of clothes

 y Maggots who born from rotten meat

 y Weevils who born from decayed wood

The  Spontaneous  generation  theory  has  been  effectively  disproved  by  the 

experiments conducted by the scientist Louis Pasteur.

98

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 99

 
Various types of elements at the centre of the Earth reacted with each other and 
different types of gases were formed. At first the atmosphere of the Earth had gases 
such as Carbon dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4) and Hydrogen sulphide (H2S). The 
absence of Oxygen (O2) in the early atmosphere is a  significant fact.

Initially, the extreme heat of the Earth caused evaporation of water on the planet. 
This evaporated water got condensed and clouds were formed. Water droplets in 
these clouds joined together and dropped onto the Earth as rain. There had been 
continuous heavy rains on the Earth for many years. This rain water which was rich 
with minerals, collected in lower lands and oceans were formed.

Figure 9.2 - Illustrations of primitive Earth

9.2   Origin of life on the Earth 

There are many beliefs and theories on origin of life on the Earth. It is believed that, 
about 3.5 billion years ago life originated on the Earth. 

Let us consider some theories about origin of life on the Earth.

Theory of special creation
According  to  this  theory,  all  living  organisms  on  Earth  were  created  by  a  super 
natural power. Since there is no scientific evidence to prove this theory, scientist do 
not pay attention to it. 

Spontaneous generation theory
This theory states that life was originated from non-living things in a spontaneous 
manner.
e.g. 

y Rats who born from pieces of clothes
y Maggots who born from rotten meat
y Weevils who born from decayed wood

The  Spontaneous  generation  theory  has  been  effectively  disproved  by  the 
experiments conducted by the scientist Louis Pasteur.

98

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 99

 
For extra knowledge

Louis  Pasteur  prepared  an  experiment  to 
prove that spontaneous generation theory 
is not an acceptable theory.

 y Similar  amounts  of  sterilized  nutritional 
media was added to two similar swan neck 
flasks. No growth of living organisms was 
observed.

Louis Pasteur

 y After about one year neck of the one flask was broken and taken away. 
 y Microbial growth was visible in the flask without the neck and no life appeared 

in the other flask.

 y As  the  conclusion,  it  was  stated  that  living  organisms  do  not  generate  

spontaneously. This was accepted as true in 1862.

Heating

No growth of
micro-organisms

Neck of the flask was 
broken
The experiment which proved the non-applicability of the spontaneous generation theory

Growth of
micro-organisms

Heating

Cosmozoic theory
This theory suggests that, the living materials might have got established on Earth 
from a fallen meteor with living organisms or by space crafts from other planets. 
This theory has not been proved scientifically.

Theory of biochemical evolution
This theory confirms that, at the beginning of the Earth, the gases in the atmosphere 
reacted with each other and the ingredients that make life possible were formed. 
It is believed that the energy required for this was supplied by electric discharges 
during lightning, eruption of volcanoes and by the ultra violet radiation of the sun. 
These materials dissolved in rain water and collected in oceans. This mixture was 
known as the primordial soup.

100

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 101

The first living cell or the pre-cell appeared as a result of a bio chemical reaction in 
primordial soup. The first organism was unicellular and was considered anaerobic 
and heterotrophic. 

Scientists have experimentally shown that the first living cell was created by the 
primordial soup.

For extra knowledge 

two  scientists  Haldane  and  Oparin 
The 
put 
the  biochemical  evolution 
forwarded 
theory  about  the  origin  of  life.  This  theory 
was  scientifically  proved  by  Stanley  Miller 
by  conducting  scientific 
in 
laboratory. 

investigations 

Stanley Miller

The first form of life on the Earth is considered to be a simple unicellular bacterium. 
Then, the first photosynthetic organisms, unicellular algae were formed. After that, 
an atmosphere containing gaseous oxygen was formed.

Many  changes  took  place  for  a  long  time  period  within  the  body  of  unicellular 
organisms and multicellular organisms were born. Gradually, tissues, organs and 
systems  were  specialized  within  these  multicellular  organisms  and  the  world  of 
animals and plants were created.

Cnidarians,  some  annelids  and  some  arthropods  are  considered  as  the  first 
multicellular organisms. 

The fish are considered as the first type of vertebrates, and amphibians originated 
from  fish. Amphibians  can  be  regarded  as  the  first  vertebrates  that  entered  into 
terrestrial environment. Reptiles evolved as a result of gradual evolutionary changes 
occurred in amphibians. The reptiles are completely adapted to the terrestrial life 
than amphibians. It is believed that birds and mammals evolved from reptiles during 
evolution. 

The  evolution  of  human  took  place  about  12  million  years  ago.  Modern  human 
originated about 5 million (5 000 000) years ago. 

The world of plants evolved by the gradual changes resulted in photosynthetic algae 
on the oceans. First, less developed plants originated which, was then followed by  
non-flowering plants and flowering plants at last.

100

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 101

Accordingly, evolution of life has occurred at different times with several changes. 
In order to understand that process, study the figure 9.3.

9.3   Evolution

Figure 9.3 

Various changes in the natural environment can have an impact on the existence of 
life.

Life’s existence is confirmed by changes that occur gradually in living organisms in 
relation to continuous changes in the environment. 

102

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 103

Figure 9.5 - Mammoth

Figure 9.6 - Dinosaur

Let us do the activity 9.1 to create a model fossil

Activity 9.1

You will need:- Kaolin/clay, plaster of Paris, binder glue, 2 yoghurt cups, a     
   spoon, shapes of animals (an oyster shell, fern leaf) a pair of    
   scissors

Method:-
 ² Fill half of a one yoghurt cup with clay. Place the shell or the leaf on it and 
press. When the print of the shell or the leaf is marked on clay, remove the 
shell or the leaf.

 ² Put some plaster of paris into the other yoghurt cup. Add some water and 
prepare a plaster. Carefully pour the prepared plaster or binder glue on to the 
prints on the clay. Keep for about 2 hours to dry.

 ² Then, cut the yoghurt cup with the scissors and take out the clay lump out of 

the plaster or binder glue.

 ² Observe the model fossils on the surface of the clay lump and plaster made 

with plaster of paris.

Step I

Step II

Step III

Step IV

Figure 9.7 - How to create a model fossil

104

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 105

Importance of evolution in bio-diversity

9.4 
There is a competition among animals for the limited resources in the environment. 
The  creatures  who  succeed,  will  be  naturally  selected  and  be  established  in  the 
environment. These selected organisms become pioneers in the environment and 
their population increases. These creatures have created a large bio-diversity in the 
natural environment. In the process of evolution, novel species can also be evolved 
from  former  species. This  is  known  as  speciation  and  this  process  broadens  the 
biodiversity further. 

For extra knowledge

Charles Darwin is considered 
as the father of evolution. 
He put forwarded the 
Natural selection theory 
which is a scientifically 
accepted theory about 
evolution. 

Assignment 9.2

Charles Darwin

Prepare a booklet by collecting information on the evidence found in Sri Lanka, 
about human evolution.
Use the evidence found at "Batadombalena" in "Kuruwita", "Pahiyangala" cave 
in "Bulathsinhala", "Ibbankatuwa", "Rawana" falls and "Pomparippu". Include 
the facts about the "Balangoda Man" too.

Summary

 ² Origin of the Earth took place about 4.5 billion years ago and origin of life 

 ²

took place 3.5 billion years ago.
“Origination of life is a result of a process of bio-chemical reactions” is the 
theory that is accepted today.

 ² Life originated from a unicellular organism that lived in the sea and developed 

into multicellular organisms.

 ² Gradual development of the simple organisms to modern complex organisms 

is called the evolution.

 ² Fossil records are the main detailed evidence of evolution.
 ² Animals that do not undergo evolutionary process are known as living fossils.
 ² Horse is an organism with complete fossil evidence about its evolution.
 ²

Important evidences about evolution of the mankind were found in Sri Lanka.               

106

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 107

Exercise
01) Select the correct or most suitable answer.

1.  The correct sentences about the origin of the Earth is,

a.    It  is  considered  that,  origin  of  the  Earth  took  place  4.5  billion 

years ago.

b.    The  first  scientific  theory  about  the  origin  of  the  universe  is 

Nebular theory.

c.    Big Bang theory is considered as a modern theory on origin of 

the Earth.

1. a and b

2. a and c

 3. b and c

4. a, b and c all

2.  The false statement about the early Earth is, 

1. As there was oxygen in the atmosphere, there was life on the Earth.
2. Gases such as carbon dioxide and methane were formed as a result of 

the reactions between elements.

3. Heavy rain fell down on the Earth for many years.
4. The rain water rich with minerals was collected to form oceans.

3.  Today’s accepted theory on origin of life on the Earth is the,

1. Theory of special creation
2. Spontaneous generation theory
3. Cosmozoic theory
4. Theory of bio-chemical evolution

4.  The true statement on the origin of life is,

a.    First living organism on Earth was a unicellular algae.
b.    Multicellular organisms were originated from the evolution of 

unicellular organisms.

c.    Origin of modern human took place 4.5 billion years ago.

1. a and b

2. a and c

3. b and c

4. a, b and c all

02) State whether the following statements are true (√) or false (x).

1.  The  first  originated  organism  on  primordial  soup  was  a 

unicellular bacterium.

2.  Gradual development of modern complex organisms from simple 

organisms is known as evolution.

3.  To  come  to  a  conclusion  on  biological  evolution,  only  fossil 

evidence is sufficient.

(   )

(   )

(   )

4.  Lingula is a living fossil found in Sri Lanka.
5.  The process of evolution too contribute towards the bio-diversity.

(   )

(   )

108

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 109

03)  Give short answers.

1. Write two examples for living fossils.

2. Simply describe the contribution of fossils to study the evolutionary process.

3. Write five places in Sri Lanka that give evidence on evolution of the mankind.

4. Write a modification on feet of horse occurred during its evolution.

5. Write three examples for organisms who became extinct from the Earth but  

whose fossils were found. 

Technical Terms

- uyd msmsreï jdoh
- ffcj úúO;ajh
- wdÈ iQmh

- ö£¸öÁi¨¦U öPõÒøP
- E°º¨£ÀÁøPø©
- BvUTÌ

Big Bang theory
Bio-diversity
Primordial soup
Bio-chemical evolution - ffcj ridhksl mßKduh - E°›μ\õ¯ÚU Tº¨¦
Spontaneous 
generation theory
Fossil
Living fossil
Theory of natural 
selection
Speciation

ußÛaø\¨ ¤Ó¨£õUPU 
öPõÒøP
- E°ºa _Ák
- ÁõÊ® E°ºa_Ák
C¯ØøPz ÷uºÄU 
-
öPõÒøP
- CÚ©õuÀ

- fmdis,h
- Ôjudk fmdis,h

- iajhx isoaO ckkjdoh

- iajdNdúl jrK jdoh

- úfYaI m%dma;sh

-

108

Science | The Evolutionary Process

Science | The Evolutionary Process 109

